 
 Mines Vocational Training Rules, 1966 
 
Chapter I 
. 
Preliminary 
 
1. Short title, application and commencement - 
(1) These rules may be called the Mines Vocational Training 1966. 
(2) Except as otherwise expressly provided, these rules shall apply to every mine of whatever 
description to watch the Mines Act, 1952 applies. 
(3) They shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, be notification in 
the Official Gazette, appoint and different dates may be appointed for different provisions of 
these rules for different classes or groups of mines or for different classes of persons or for different areas. 
2. Definition:-  In these rules, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context- 
 
(a) " Act" means the Mines Act, 1952 (35 of 1952);  
(b) " Form " means  a form appended to these rules; 
(c) " Manager  " means any person who is responsible for management, supervision and direction 
of a mine  and includes a mine superintendent who is appointed by the  owner or the agent of 
a mine under section 17 of the Act; 
(d) " Metalliferous mine " means any mine other than a coal or an oil mine; 
(e) " Regional Inspector " means the Inspector of Mines in charge of, 
(i) the region or local  area or areas in which name is situated, or 
(ii) the group or class of mines to which the mine belongs and over which he exercises powers under the  Act; 
 
(f) " Schedule " means a Schedule appended to these rules. 
                                                            
                                                           CHAPTER II 
  
                                                PERSONS TO BE TRAINED  
 
 
3. Application of Rules  -(1) These rules shall apply to all persons employed in a mine, other 
than the persons specified herein, namely : 
 
(a) Persons employed or to be employed for the purpose of saving life or property or dealing 
with circumstances arising out of an accident : 
  
Provided that the owner, agent or manager of the mine shall forthwith give notice of every such employment to the Chief Inspector. 
 
(b) Persons holding positions enumerated below being persons employed in a confidential 
capacity or in a position of supervision or a management ; 
 
(i) manager, undermanager, under ground manager, assistant manager, ventilation officer and safety officer 
(ii) mining, electrical and mechanical engineer; 
(iii) overman, foreman, sirdar and mate; 
  (iv) mechanical and electrical foreman and electrical supervisor; 
 
 (v) Surveyor and assistant surveyor; 
(vi) medical officer, chemist, assayer, metallurgist and welfare or personnel officer; and  (vii) any other person who, in the opinion of the Chief Inspector, holds a position of 
supervision or management by whatever name called. 
 
(c) Shortfirer and blasters. (d) Clerk, accountants and register keepers. 
 
(e) Persons who have undergone a course of training which is part of study at an institution 
approved by the Central Government in this behalf. 
 
(f) Apprentice mechanics or apprentice electricians, if they have undergone an approved 
course of training at a mine mechanisation center or other institution approved by the Chief Inspector in this behalf: 
 
Provided that the exemption granted to the persons specified in clause (d),(e), and (g) 
shall be subject to the condition that the said person shall undergo a course of refresher training as specified in Rule 8.  
(2) The Chief Inspector may, by order, for reasons to be recorded in writing and subject to such conditions as he may specify therein, exempt any person, class or category of persons from 
undergoing any training under these rules. 
 
4. Disputes regarding training to be decided by the Chief Inspector-  If any question arises 
as to whether a particular person or class or category of persons is required by these rules to 
undergo training or not, the same shall be referred to the Chief Inspector for decision. 
 5. Standard of training  - The Chief Inspector may issue such instructions, not inconsistent with 
these rules, as he may deem fit, to ensure that the training imparted under these rules at the 
various training centers confirm to certain uniform standards and every such training shall be in accordance with such instructions. 
 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
General Vocational Training. 
 
6. Scope and Standard  -  (1) Every person proposed to be employed in mine on the surface  or 
in opencast workings ( other than a person who has held  any such previous employment) shall, before he is employed, undergo a course of technical and gallery training as specified in the First Schedule : 
 
Provided that in respect of such class or kind of work as the Chief Inspector may, from time to 
time, by notification specify, every person proposed to be employed thereto shall, before he is so 
employed, undergo a further course of practical training on actual operations for a period of not less than six working days.  
(2)  Every person proposed to be employed belowground in a mine, (other than a person who 
has held any such previous employment) shall, before he is so employed, undergo - 
 
(a) a course of theoretical and gallery training and gallery training as  specified in the 
Second Schedule, and  
(b) a course of practical training on actual operations for a period of not less than twelve 
working days 
 
 
 Provided that every such person proposed to be employed in a mine wherein safety 
lamps are required to be used (hereinafter called gassy mine) shall, before he is so employed, undergo a further course of training about the danger of inflammable gas and methods of dealing 
with the same as specified in the Third Schedule. 
 
7. Training of persons previously employed  -Before a person who has previously worked in 
mines only one the surface or in opencast working is employed belowground, or before a 
person who has previously worked belowground in non-gassy mines only is employed belowground in a gassy mine, he shall undergo such additional courses of training as 
specified in sub-rule 6. 
 
 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
REFRESHER TRAINING 
 
 
8. Scope and standard  - Wherever a person returns to employment on the surface or in 
opencast working or to employment belowground in a mine, after an absence from work for a 
period exceeding one year he shall, within one month of his joining duty, undergo refresher 
training as detailed in the Fourth Schedule, which shall include a minimum of - 
 
(1) Three safety lecture and demonstration in the case of persons working on the surface or 
in opencast workings; 
 
(2) Six safety lectures and demonstrations in addition to the training specified in clause (1) in 
the case of persons working belowground in a non-gassy mine; 
 
(3) Six further lectures and demonstrations about the danger of inflammable gas and 
methods of ling with the same, in addition to the training specified in clause (1) and (2) in the case of persons working belowground gassy mine. 
 9. Training of persons already employed    - Every person in employment in a mine at the date 
of commencement of this rule shall undergo the refresher training as specified in Rule 8, and it 
shall be sufficient compliance with this rule if, before the expiry of every year from such commencement, at least one-fifth of the person so employed are given such training.  
10, Training of persons employed belowground in gassy mines-  Notwithstanding anything 
contained in these rules, every person employed belowground in a gassy mine shall within a 
period of one year from the commencement of this rule, undergo atleast that part of the refresher training as is specified in the Fourth Schedule under the heading- " 3. Additional for gassy mine workers." 
11. Arrangement for refresher training: -  The refresher training shall be so arranged that the 
persons who have to undergo training can attend the same conveniently either before or after 
their normal working hours.   
CHAPTER  V 
 
TRAINING OF SPECIAL CATEGORIES OF EMPLOYEES  
 
12. Training of timber Mistry - Every person who:   
 
(i) is newly employed as timber mistry in a mine, or  
 
 
 (ii) has not worked as a timber mistry in a mine for a period of six months immediately 
preceding his employment or re-employment , undergo a course of training in timber as specified in the Fifth Schedule, in addition to the course of training specified under 
Chapter- III or Chapter IV as may be applicable to him. 
 
13. Training of persons in handling of explosives -  (1) Every person other than a qualified 
shortfirer or blaster who is likely to be employed on a job which involves handling of explosives 
shall , before he is so employed, in addition to the course of training specified, under Chapter III or Chapter IV as the case may be , undergo a course of training in the handling and use of 
explosives, as detailed in the Sixth Schedule. Every person who has undergone the said training 
shall undergo the training again before re-employment if he has not worked in handling explosives for a continuous period of six months or more before such re-employment. The training under this rule shall be arranged that the persons concerned can attend the same conveniently either before or after their normal working hours.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub rule (I), in the case of metalliferous mines having 
opencast working only, the course of training may be confined to not less than four lectures and demonstration covering only such items of the Sixth Schedule as refer to opencast working and general principals of shotfiring.  
14. Training of person on shotfiring -  (1) Every person eligible to appear at the Shotfirer's 
Certificate of Competency Examination and who intends to appear at the said examination within the succeeding three months, shall,, before he appears for the examination and in addition to the training specified in Rule 13 undergo a course of training as detailed in the Seventh Schedule. The training under the rule shall be so arranged that the persons concerned can attend same conveniently either before or after their normal working hours. 
 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in Rule 3, the training specified in the Seventh 
Schedule shall also be undergone within one month of employment, or re-employment, as the case may be, by-  
(i) every shotfirer or blaster on employment in an another mine except in case where he 
has already undergone such training and  
 
(ii) every person  who though qualified  to fire shots has not worked as a shortfirer for a       continuous period of six months or more, on re-employment as a shotfirer : 
 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-rules (1) and (2) in the case of persons, 
working in metalliferous mines having opencast workings only, or holding blaster, restricted 
certificate, it shall be sufficient if the course of training is confined to not less than eight lecture 
and demonstrations and covering only such items of Seventh Schedule  as refer to opencast 
workings and general principles of shotfiring. 
 
15. Training of other categories of persons  - The Chief Inspector may by general or special 
order, require that every person, other that those specified in clause (a) to (g) of sub-rule (1) of 
Rule 3, to be newly employed in a mine in such kind of class of work, as may be specified therein, shall undergo a specified course training.  
16. Time limit in respect of the training of persons already employed on banding of explosives-  Notwithstanding anything contained in these rules, every person employed on 
handling of explosives shall undergo the training specified in Rule13 within a period of one year 
from the date of commencement of this rule.  
17. Periodical training in gas testing-  Every person holding a gas testing shall once in every 
year, person eligible to appear at the Gas-testing Certificate Examinations and who intends to 
appear at the examination within the succeeding three months, shall before he appears for the 
 
 examination, undergo a course of training as detailed in the 8th Schedule. The training under this 
rule shall be so arranged that the persons concerned can attend the same either before after their normal working hours. 
 
                  
CHAPTER VI 
 
TRAINING CENTRES AND ARRANGEMENTS FOR TRAINING.  
 18. Training Centre: - The owner, agent or manager of every mine shall provide and maintain a training centre which shall be adequate for the purpose of imparting the training required to be undergo by the persons who are employed or to be employed in that mine:  Provided that the Chief Inspector may, by order, for reasons to be recorded in writing and subject 
to such conditions as he may specify therein, authorise that a common training centre may be 
provided and maintained in respect of two or more mines by the owners agents or managers thereof.  
19. Arrangements for the training centre: -  Every training centre shall have such staff, 
equipment and other facilities as may be approved by the Chief Inspector or as may be required 
by him, from time to time, by order in writing. 
 
20. Training Officer: -  (1) Every training centre shall be placed under the charge of a whole time 
or part time. Training Officer as may be specified by the Chief Inspector. The Chief Inspector may 
further specify the qualifications and experience required for such Training Officer. 
 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-rule (1), where the Training Officer is unable to perform his duties by reason of temporary absence, illness or other cause, the owner, agent or manager, as the case may be, may authorise in writing any other person to act in his place.  Provided that except  in a case where the person so authorised possesses the qualifications and 
experience specified by the Chief Inspector under sub-rule (1), the authority to act as Training 
Officer shall cease to have effect on the expiry of 30 days from the date of the authorisation unless an order in writing has been obtained from the Chief Inspector or the Regional Inspector for the continuance of such person beyond the said period.  (4) A written notice of every appointment, discharge, dismissal, resignation or termination service 
of a Training Officer and of the date thereof shall be sent by the owner, agents or manager to 
the Chief Inspector and the Regional Inspector within seven days from the date of such appointment, authorisation, discharge, dismissal, resignation or termination of service as the case may be. 
 
21. Duties of Training Officer: -  (1) It shall be the duty of the Training Officer: - 
 
(i) to organise and supervise the training of every person undergoing training under him 
in pursuance of these rules : 
 
(ii) to maintain records of the training given to every person and to furnish weekly 
     reports to the manager on the progress of the persons undergoing training ; 
 
(iii) to maintain records of the supervision in respect of the practical training on actual       operations referred to in Rule 6 and  
 
(iv) to discharge such other duties as may be necessary for, to  proper compliance of  
      these rules. 
 
  
(2) Every Training Officer shall keep a record of his work and shall, at the end of every year, forward to the Chief Inspector, through the owner, agent or manager of the mine concern3d a 
summary of the report of his work during the year. 
 
22.Trainers: -  For the purpose of the practical training referred to rule 6, every person to be 
employed in a mine shall be placed under the direct supervision of an experienced workman of 
an appropriate category, employed on operations hereinafter referred to as trainer.  
23. Qualification of trainers: - (1) No person shall function as a trainer unless he has attend not 
less than six lectures on safety in mines, as may be specified for the purpose and approved by 
the Chief inspector.  (2) Trainers shall be selected only amongst the persons, who in the opinion of the owner, agent or manager of the mine, are safety minded, skilled and experienced workmen who have an 
aptitude for given guidance and practical training to other persons. 
 
24. Duties of trainers and persons undergoing training: -  (1) The trainers shall be responsible 
for the safety of the persons undergoing training under him. 
 (2) The trainer shall, apart from discharging his normal duties, see that the persons put under his 
charge for training, pick up work, understand the dangers inherent in the job and develop 
habits, which would ensure safety in mines. 
 (3) The trainer shall see that the persons undergoing training, under him move within the mine 
along with him. 
 
(4) Every trainer shall show to the persons undergoing training under him, the quickest and 
safest routes of exit from the sections where he is likely to work. Every person undergoing training shall, whilst under training, comply with the directions of the trainer under whom he is put in charge. 
 
25. Training allowance: -  Every trainer shall, in addition to his normal wages, he paid by the 
owner, agent or manager a training allowance of Rs.0.50 per trainee for every day a trainee has 
worked under his supervision. Not more than two trainees shall be placed under the charge of a trainer at a time.  
CHAPTER VII 
 
ALLOWANCE OF TRAINEES AND ISSUE OF CERTIFICATES.  
 
26. Trainees : - Every person to be newly employed in mine, while undergoing training in 
accordance with these rules, shall for all purposes be considered only as a trainee. 
 
27. Stipend to trainees -  (1) Every person, while undergoing training under Chapter III and under 
Rule 12 & 15 shall be paid by the owner, agent or manager, daily allowance, for each day of 
attendance, of any amount equivalent to the wages (inclusive of allowances) which will be payable to him on employment after completion of training, subject to maximum of Rs. 1.50 per day.  
 Provided that the maximum aforesaid shall not apply in case of a person already working 
in a mine while undergoing training in accordance with rule 7.  Every person undergoing training under Chapter IV and Rule 13,14 and 17 shall be paid by the owner, agent or manager, an allowance per lecture attended by him.  
 
 28. Certificate of trainees -  (1) Every person who undergoes a course of training prescribed in 
these rules shall, on completion of the training be interviewed by the Training Officer and if the 
said officer is satisfied as to the progress and performance of the trainee, he shall grant a 
certificate in Form A or Form B, as the case may be. The certificate so granted shall be 
countersigned by the owner, agent or manager. Where the Training Officer is not satisfied with the progress or performance of any trainee, he shall report the same to the manager, who may either discharge him or, if he thanks fir arrange to give him further training.  (2) The cost of the photograph to be fixed on the certificate in Form A of Form B shall born by the 
owner or agent. 
 (3) A person who has obtained a certificate on successful completion of the training shall be eligible for absorption, in any mine, to the category of the post for which he has been trained.   
29. Duplicate Certificate: -  If any person proves to the satisfaction of the Training Officer that he 
has lost the certificate granted to him under Rule 28, the Training Officer may, on payment of the cost of the photograph to be affixed on the certificate, grant to him a copy of the certificate. The word "DUPLICATE' shall be stamped across the copy.  
30. Certificate to be delivered to the Management : - Every person employed in a mine shall - 
 
(i) if he obtained the certificates prior to such employment, at the time of the employment, and  
 (ii) if he obtained the certificates during the course of employment, within such time as may be specified by the manager of the mine.  
deliver the certificate issued to him under these rules, so the manager  of the mine who shall 
keep the certificate in safe custody and issue a receipt for the same. On the termination of employment, certificate so deposited shall be returned to the employee.   
CHAPTER VIII 
 
MISCELLANEOUS 
 
31. Inspection: -  The Chief Inspector or any Inspector may enter, inspect and examine any 
training center or any part thereof and make such examination or inquiry as he thinks fit in order 
to ascertain whether the provisions of these rules and of any orders made thereunder are being complied with. 
 32. Power to relax: -  Where in the opinion of the Chief Inspector, the conditions pertaining to a 
same or part thereof are such as to render compliance with any provision contained in these rules 
un-necessary or impracticable, he may be order in writing and subject to such conditions as he may specify therein, exempt the mine or part thereof, as the case may be, from the said 
provisions. 
     
 
     
 
 FIRST SCHEDULE 
 
{See Rule 6 (1) } 
 
Course of Theoretical and Gallary training for surface and opencast workers. 
 
Ist Day (Surface)  Talk:   Organisation, time keeping, the need for discipline and punctuality, other matters of 
general interest. 
Training in First aid: Visit:   Attendance room, Pit head bath, Canteen, Rest shelter, Crèche.  2
nd day (surface) 
 
Talk: Tramways and siding, Haulage rooms, Winding rooms, Boilers, Electrical Gears. Workshop. 
 3
rd Day (Surface) 
 Talk: Benching in quarries, Dressing of overhangs, Fencing, First aid and Hygiene. Training in First aid. 
Visit: Quarries, Medical Centers, 
Practical work: Tub Manipulation, Coupling, tramming lowering, re-railing to tubs.  4
th Day (surface) 
 
Talk: Shotfiring and Safety regulations. 
Training in First aid. Visit: Practical demonstration of taking shelter etc. Practical work: Building of sound-bag stopping.  5
th Day 
 
Talk: Legislation and duties of workpersons. Training in First aid. Visit: What's wrong. Practical work: Lying of tracks.   
6
th Day 
 Talk: Mine official and their duties, oral test.   
 
     
 
                                                 
 
 
 SECOND SCHEDULE 
 
{See Rule 6 (2) (a)} 
 
Course of Theoretical and Gallery training for workers below ground . 
 
Ist Day  Talk : Method of transport belowground, signaling, manhole and other safety appliances on haulage roads. 
Training in First aid. 
Visit:  Underground pit bottom, travelling roadway, second outlet, haulage and tramming roadways, stations and fencing belowground. Practical work: Tub manipulation, coupling, tramming, lowering re-railing of tubs and signaling, laying of pipes and track.  
2
nd Day  
 Talk: Face works, roof control, testing of roof support regulations, First aid and Hygiene. Training in First aid. Visit Underground working faces, underground latrines, first aid stations. 
Practical work: Prop setting, chock building and withdrawal. 
 3
rd Day  
 Talk:  Ventilation, Lighting, Legislation and duties of work-persons. Training in First aid. 
Visit: Underground- Ventilation and Lighting devices, Fan house, air crossings, stopping, 
regulator doors. Etc. Practical work: Erecting brattices, ventilation of blind ends, Practical demonstration of fire fighting device, detection of noxious gases.  4
th Day 
 
Talk:  Shotfiring and safety regulations, Causes and prevention of the fire underground, care of lamps. Training in First aid. Visit: Underground practical demonstration of taking shelter etc. Practical work: Building of sand bag stopping. 
 
5
th Day 
 Talk: Mine gases (Particularly carbon monoxide, carbon, dioxide and methane) and dangers therefrom. Testing for the same. General revision. 
Training in First aid. 
Practical work: Cleaning of galleries.  6
th Day 
 Talk: Mine official and their duties, oral test. 
Visit: Underground "what's wrong" 
     
 
 THIRD SCHEDULE 
{See Rule 6 (2)(b)} 
 
Course of special additional training for entrants to gassy mine,   
Ist Day 
 Talk: Dangers of inflammable gas, effects of inflammable gas in different percentages. Gas caps, Difference between combustion and explosion. After damp- its effects. Methods of testing for inflammable gas with Flame safety lamp. 
Demonstration: Gas caps, Difference between combustion and explosion. 
Visit: Visit to safety lamp cabin to see how lamps are maintained, cleaned etc. and to study construction of safety lamps.  2
nd Day 
 
Talk: Principle of construction of flame safety lamps and of flameproof electrical equipment. 
Assembly of flame safety lamps. Care of safety lamps during use. Dangers of opening or tampering with safety lamps. Demonstration: Effects of wire gauze on flame. Practical work: Testing for gas.  Visit: Visit to workshop to see flame proof equipment. 
 
3
rd Day 
 Talk: Duties of workers in gassy mine and where inflammable gas exists. Dangers of smoking contrabands. Visit: Visit (1) to lamps cabin to see arrangements for checking lamps before issue and after 
receipt and (2) to the mine entrances to see arrangement for checking safety lamps and for 
searching of contrabands. Practical work: Cleaning and assembling safety lamps.  4
th Day 
 
Talk:  Explosion and health hazards from dust. Methods of suppressing dust. Water sprays. 
Cleaning and stone dusting. Wet cutting. Wet drilling. Use of respirators. Occurrences of inflammable gas. Methods of removing gas. Necessity for good ventilation at the face. Ventilation devices. Visit: underground visit to see dust suppression arrangements and measures. Surface and underground visit to see ventilation devices. 
Practical work: Erection of brattices. Ventilation of blind ends. 
 5
th Day 
 Talk: Dangers of Shotfiring in gassy mine. Precaution - Underground visit to Shotfiring. 
 
6
th Day  
 General revision: Oral test.   
 
     
 
 FOURTH SCHEDULE 
{See Rule 8 and 10} 
 
Course for Refresher Training. 
 
(Each talk to be followed by discussion. Duration of each talk and discussion to be not less than 
two hours.)  
1. Fur Surface/ Opencast Workings. 
 
Talk 1: Mine Organisation, time keeping, need for discipline and punctuality and other matters of 
general interest.  Talk 2: Rules, standing orders in force at the mine. Safety in the vicinity of machinery.    
Talk 3: Benching in quarries. Dressing of overhangs. Fencing, First Aid Hygiene. 
  
2. Additional for underground workers. 
 
Talk 4: Dangers from haulage, Manholes and other safety appliances. Signaling. 
 Talk 5: Testing of roof, Dressing of roof and overhangs. Supports, Chocks, bars and props.  Talk 6: Ventilation, Control devices. Danger from old workings. Causes and prevention of fires,            Noxious gases. 
 
Talk 7: Dangers or Shotfiring, Safety precautions.  Talk 8: Legislation, Duties of workmen, Fencing.   Talk 9: General revision and discussion. 
 
Talk 10: Occurrence of inflammable gas. Danger from inflammable gas. Combustion and               explosion. After damp. Its effects.  Talk 11: Principle of construction of flame safety lamps and of flameproof equipment. Gas caps.              Methods of testing for gas. 
 
Talk 12: Duties of workers where inflammable gas exists. Contrabands. Danger of tampering                  with safety lamps. Methods of removing gas. Necessity of good ventilation at the face.  Talk 13: Explosion and health hazard from dust. Methods of suppressing dust. 
 
Talk 14: Dangerous of Shotfiring in gassy mines. Precautions.  Talk 15: General revision and discussion.   
 
     
 
 FIFTH SCHEDULE 
 
{See Rule (12) } 
 
Course of Training for Timber Mistry 
 
(Training in First Aid to be given to every trainee who has not already undergone such training.)  Ist Day  
Talk: Type or rocks and their characteristics. Dangers from fall of ground. Need for artificial 
         support. Use of protective equipment. Talk and practical work: Handling and transport of timber including lowering in inclines and shafts.         Correct methods of lifting and shifting. Stocking of timber.  2
nd Day 
 
Talk: Different materials for support, their strength and characteristics. Application. Fire danger          from timber and cuttings. Talk and practical work: Tools for timbering. Their selection care and maintenance. Sylvester          prop withdrawal.   
 
3
rd Day 
 Talk:  Type of support in galleries and drives. Support of faulted, disturbed and weak ground.          Clearing of falls of roof and erecting supports. Roof support. Side support. Talk and Practical work: Talking Measurements for putting supports. Selection of timber size. 
         Preparing lids. Lagging and packing. 
 4
th Day 
 Talk: System for support in depillaring area/stopes and longwall faces. Systematic Timbering          Rules both in development and depillaring area. 
Talk and practical work: Sawing of timber. Erection of shot props and cogs. Withdrawal of  
        supports.  5
th Day 
 Talk:  Type of supports in shafts (including sinking shafts), raises and winzes, repair of such  
         supports, Erection of barricades. Erection of brattices and temporary stopping. Erection of  
         fences. Talk and practical work: Erection of talk ;props and cogs. Lagging of sides.  6
th Day 
 
Talk: Maintenance of supports. Tightening. Testing of roofs and sides. Typical accident in          timbering and to Timbermen. Talk and practical work: Erection of timber on steep gradients and supporting irregular places.         Miscellaneous jobs for Timbermen.  
 
       
 
 SIXTH SCHEDULE 
 
(See Rule 13) 
 
Course of Training in the handling and use of explosives. 
 
Ist Day  Talk:  What is an explosive? General composition of explosives. Difference between low and high           explosives. Low explosives an their firing. Safety and its burning speed. 
 
2
nd Day 
 Talk: High explosive, their detonation. Electric shotfiring.  3
rd Day 
 
Talk: Dangers from explosive. Charging and firing of shots clearing of fumes produced during           shotfiring.  4
th Day 
 
Talk: Dangers from blasting in gassy mines. Cracks in shot holes. Permitted explosives.  5
th Day 
 Talk: Dangerous nature explosives. Care in handling explosives. Taking shelter. Storage of  
         explosives on surface and belowground. Issue of explosives Return of unused explosives. 
 6
th Day 
 Talk:  General revision and discussion.  
 
     
 
    
 
     
 
     
 
 SEVENTH SCHEDULE 
{See Rule (14)} 
 
Course of Training on short firing 
 Ist Day          High and low explosive. Difference between them. Their constituents.  2ndDay 
 
         Shot-firing accessories. Safety fuse and its burning speed. Detonators.  3
rd Day 
         Provision of regulations etc. relating to transport handling and use of explosives. 
 
4
th Day 
         Storage of explosives, both above and belowground. Issue of explosives, Return of unused         explosives. 
 
5
th Day 
         Correct drilling and placing of shot holes, Charging and firing of shots. Blown out shots.         Taking shelter.  
6
th Day 
        Danger from explosives in gassy mines, permitted explosives, precautions during shot firing        in gassy mines. Dangers from cracks in shot holes.  7
th Day 
 
        Dealing with misfire. Provisions of relating to duties of shot-fires.  8
th Day 
        Examination of working places and roadway after shot firing. Clearing roadways of dust and 
       fumes after shot firing. 
 9
th Day  
         Firing of shots singly and in rounds. Use of delay action detonators. Testing of circuits. 
 
10
th Day 
          Blasting with Ammonium Nitrate- Fuel Oil Explosive. Precautions.  11
th Day 
 
         Heavy blasting in opencast mines. Blasting with liquid Oxygen. Precautions.  12
th Day 
          General revision and discussion. Writing of reports. 
 
 EIGHTH SCHEDULE 
 
(See Rule 17) 
 
Course of Training in Gas-Testing . 
 
 (Demonstration to be arranged with every talk and each talk to be followed by discussion. The duration of each talk and discussion to be not less than two hours.)  
Ist Talk: 
        Physical and chemical properties of inflammable gas Occurrence of inflammable gas. Gas        outbursts. Danger from inflammable gas in different percentages. Difference between        combustion and explosion.  
2
nd Talk 
        Other mine gases: their properties and effects. After damp, its composition and effects.  3
rd Talk 
 
       What makes a safety lamp safe? Construction and assembly of safety lamps, both of flame        and electric type. Care of safety lamps. Opening, cleaning, assembling and testing of safety        lamps.  4
th Talk 
 
       Methods of testing for inflammable gas with flame safety lamps. Gas caps. Accumulation and        Percentage tests. Precautions where gas in present.  5
th Talk 
 
       Provision of regulations relating to safety lamps, and to the presence of inflammable 
       gas. Other means of testing for inflammable gas.  6
th Talk 
        General revision and discussion. 
 
    
 
     
 
     
 
 FORM- A 
 
{See Rule 28 (1)} 
 
Certificate of Training for employment in a mine on surface and in opencast working/belowground 
in non-gassy mine.                      I, hereby certify that Shri/Shrimati …S/o/D/o/W/o… Village … Thana (police Station)…   P.O. …District…State… has between **… duly undergone the training required under Chapter III of 
the Mines Vocational Training Rules, 1966, for employment in a mine on surface and in opencast 
workings*/ and belowground in non-gassy/and gassy mines.   Space for affixing the  Photograph of the  
Person trained. 
                                                                                Signed…  
Date                                                                      Training Officer… 
                                                                                Mine/Training Centre  (Specify below whether non-gassy mine)  
Signature of left hand thumb impression 
of  the person trained …                                              Counter signature of  Date…                                                                   The Agent or Manager…  
 
 *Delete whichever is not applicable.  ** Insert dates between which the training was undergone.  
 
    
 
     
 
     
 
 FORM- B 
 
{See Rule 28 (1)}  
 
Certificate of refresher Training */Training of special categories of workmen. 
 
I, hereby certify that Shri /Shrimati  …S/o/D/o/W/o…Village…Thana(Police Station)… 
P.O…District…State…has between …duly undergone the refresher **/ special training required 
under Chapter IV*/ Chapter V of the Mines Vocational Training, 1966, for …***  
 
Space for affixing the  Photograph of the person Trained   
Date…                                                                                                            Signed… 
                                                                                                                       Training  Officer 
                                                                                                                …Mine/Training Center. 
 (Specify below whether non-gassy or Gassy mine)  
 Signature of left hand thumb  
  impression of the person trained…                                                                                                                 Counter Signature of  
Date                                                                                                      the Agent or Manager … 
 
                                                                                                No,24/1/65-ML/    *Delete whichever is not applicable. 
 
** Insert dates between which the training was undergone. *** Specify here the refresher special training undergone.    
 
    
 
     
 
       
 
 SCHEDULE XII 
FORM I 
 
1.0  Name of Center Code No. of the center 
2.0 State & District in which it is situated.  Notice of program of training during quarter 
ending …199 
3.0 Name of mines catered  4.0 Approximate no of students in each batch   
Batch 
 
No.of week Actual 
date from-- to  Session Category 
of worker Type of 
course schedule Batch 
no.   
    
1. 2. 3. 
4. 
   12. 
 Note:  1.For Session Use M for morning, E for  evening Signature of Training officer/ Inspector 
2. category of workers- Name in Block letters 
3. Type of Course- Use B for basic, S for special, R for refresher Date… 
 
  
 
     
 
    
 
     
 
     
 
 
 SCHEDULE - XII 
 
FORM- 2 
 
Notice of Training program for … Batch. 
 Category of workers:  Type of course:  
Schedule: 
 Batch No.  From:                   To:                                       Hours of Session  
 
Serial No. Name of Mine Name and surname of 
trainee Designation 
 
   
 
     
 
     
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                              Signature of the Trainin g Officer, 
                                                                                                       Dated… 
 
 
 
              
 
 SCHEDULE - XII 
 
FORM- 3 
 
Category of Workers.                                      Name of Center …  
 Type of Course …                                      Location …  Batch Number …                                   Program  Training Week during Ending  …  
Particulars 
of session (Special hours) Schedule & 
Talk Number. Schedule & 
Talk Number Schedule & 
Talk Number  Schedule 
&Talk Number Schedule & 
Talk Number Remarks. 
First day of 
the week.       
Second day.       
Third Day       
Fourth Day       
Fifth Day       
Sixth Day       
   
 
 
                                              Signature of Training Officer…                                               Name in Block Letters…                                               Date… 
 
     
 
     
 
    
 
     
 
  
 
  
SCHEDULE - XII 
 
FORM- 4 
  Name of the Center…                                           Code No. of the Center.  Address …                                            Index No…  
Owner… 
  
INDEX FOLDER 
 
1.Name of the Trainee (in block letters 7. Photograph of the Trainee 
2. Father's name: 
3. Permanent Address: 
4.Date of birth : Pass Port Size 
5. Educational standard :  8. Identification marks 
6. Language known to.(Mention: 
speak, Read, Write, Follow etc General Particulars 
9. signature or Thumb Impression 
of the trainee. 
 
       
 
 
  
  
 
 
SCHEDULE  - XII 
 
FORM- 5 
 
1.Category of Workers: 
 
2.Course:                                  Register of Trainees attended V.T.Centre during…   3.Batch No.                  …   ………………………………….  Training Center  4.Duration of course  …                                               to…….. 
 
 
Serial 
No. Name of 
Mine Name & 
Surname of trainee Designation Index 
Number Talk 
No… Session..
Date… Total 
attendance Passed 
or Failed. 
        
    
     Total No. Present. 
 
  
  
SCHEDULE   - XII 
 
FORM - 6 
 
Performance Chart for Trainees . 
 
1.   Name of the Center                                                                  Code No. of Center  
 
2.   State and District in which it is situated                                    Serial No. of  Report.. 
 
3. Name of Mines catered:  4.    Date of commencement of course:                                          Year: 
 
5.  Date of completion of course :  6.  Type of course:  
7.  Batch No. 
 
Serial No. Name & surname 
of trainee Name of the 
Mine Index Number Certificate 
Number Date of issue 
of certificate. 
      
  
 
  
 
  
                                                            Signature of Training Officer,  
                                                            Name in Block letters: 
                                                              Date… 
 
  
  
 
SCHEDULE  XII 
 
FORM  - 7 
 
 
1. Name of Center…                                                            Code No. of  Center. 
 
2. State/District in which it is situated   3. Names of Mines catered …         Progress Chart of the Training Center for Quarter Ending,,,,, 
 
 
Date Number of Trainees. 
  
Sl.No Catego
ry of worker Type 
of course Batch 
No. Sched
ule 
Comm
ence
ment 
of course Compl
etion 
of 
course Enroll
ed in 
the 
batch Compl
eted 
the 
Course Succe
ssful 
in test Rema
rks.    
 
   
   
 
     
 
           
 
  Batches where training is still in Progress are also  to be shown. These may be repeated in the next  
Quarter. 
  
Signature of Training Officer 
 
Name in block letters. 
 
        Date.     
 
 
 
 
  
SCHEDULE -XII 
 
Form - 8 
 Notice of Opening/closing/Re-opening/Change of Name of Training Center (See Rule 18)  To The Chief Inspector of Mines, Dhanbad. The Regional Inspector of Mines, No.………….  Region… 
P.O…            Dist….       
Date.   Sir,  
I have to furnish the following particulars of … (specify Opening/Closing/Re-opening/Change 
of name etc.) of … Training Center.   I.Particulars of the Training Center 
 
(a) Name of the Center: (b) Location: (c) Post Office: (d) District: (e) State: 
(f) Group/ unit 
(g) Name of Mines catered : (h) Name and address of the Owner, Agent of the mine in which the center is situated. 
Owner 
       Agent:  
II. Date of Opening/Closing/Re-opening/Change of Name of Training Center. 
 III. In case of change of Name of Training Center:  
(a) Old Name : 
 
(b) New Name : 
       IV. In case of closure:  
(a) Period of closing.  
(b) Reason of closure: 
 Date ………………………………                                             .Signature………………..  Place………………..                                                             Name in Block Letter …….  
*These relate to the                                                          Designation: Owner/Agent/Manager  
 Particulars of the mine                                                     Power of Attorney holder.                 Where the center is situated.     
   
 
  
SCHEDULE XII 
FORM- 9 
 
 
To The Chief Inspector of Mines, Dhanbad. The Regional Inspector of Mines, No…Region... P.O…                     Dist…  
 
Sir,  I have to furnish the following particulars of …  (Specify appointment/termination) of Training Officer/Inspector in respect of the following Center. 
 
1. Particulars of the Training Center. 
 
(a) Name of Center: (b) Group/ Unit 
(c) Post Office 
(d) District (e) State: (f) Name of  mines catered to : (g) Name and address of the owner and Agent of the mine in which the center is situated. 
 
II. Appointment of Training Officer Instructor. 
 A. (a) Name of person appointed;  (b) Designation:                                                                    Date of joining… 
      (c) Qualifications: 
 
                                                          (i) Academic…….. 
                                                                             (ii) Name of Certificate and No. 
                                                    (iii) Experience: 
 
 
 (d) Full-time/part time 
 (e) Signature of person appointed…. 
  B. Termination of appointment of Officials.  
(a) Name…. 
(b) Designation… (c) Date of termination … 
 *Strike out item not applicable                                          Signature  
                                                                            Name in Block letters 
                                                                    Designation: Owner/Agent/manager 
                                                                   Power of Attorney holder (These related                                                                  to the mine where the center is situated.)  
**Particulars to be furnished separately for each Training Officer/ Inspector. 
 
 
  
SCHEDULE -- XII 
FORM - A 
 
 
Number…  This is to certify that Sri/Srimati …  S/O, D/O,W/O…                    of Village…             Thana…                  Post Office… 
 
District…         State…            Employed in …                                         mines…       Having successfully undergone the training under Schedule Number…     For above ground/opencast working/Metalliferous Mines/belowground  in coal mine having seams of ………  degree of gassiness/belowground in Matalliferous mine notified by the Chief 
Inspector of Mines is awarded this CERTIFICATE. Class of worker… 
  Type of Course Basic/ Refresher Special               SIGNATURE OF TRAINING OFFICER  
                                                                           (Name in Block letters with date) 
                                                                              Training Center...  Date of Commencement Of Course                         Registration No.of the Training center.  
Index Card Number … 
                                                                                           Countersigned by ……. Space for Affixing photograph 
                                                                              Agent/ Manager… 
                                                                                                              … Mine     *Delete whichever is not applicable  
.**State degree of gassiness of the mine. 
*** State nature of job.  Note: See overleaf for entries of the backside of the certificate.  
 
 
    
 
    
(Back space of Certificate) 
 
  
Particulars of previous training in chronological order. 
 
Serial No. Name & 
Registration Number of the Center Class of 
worker Type of 
course Date of 
commencement Certificate 
number. Initial of 
Training Officer. 
       
 
 
 
 N.B.- According to the result of Tripartite meeting by the representatives of Owners, Labours and the Government held in 1071, the Schedule XII are being implemented the Vocational training centers in the mines although it is not enacted. 
 
  
 
 
SCHEDULE  - XII 
 
SYLLABUS FOR JOB- TRAINING. 
 
Duration Revised as per D.G's Cir.No.(Legis) 4 of 1975. 
 Note:  The management may make additions and modifications to the recommended 
syllabus to suit the particular conditions of the mine, with prior intimation to the Chief 
Inspector.  The management shall, however propose for approval of the Chief Inspector, suitable syllabus in respect of class or kind of workers for which no syllabus has been recommended in Schedule xii. The duration of Basic/Refresher job training in respect of 
such class or kind of workers shall not be less than 18 days and 9 days respectively. 
 
Sl.no. Class of workers 
or Trades of Workers Recommended Syllabus of Courses No. of 
Days for basic 
training No. of 
days of Refresher 
training 
1 2 3 4 5 
 
1. 
  Track layers Track, its purpose and components thereof, 
their use, size and use of rails, Fish plates, sleepers, nails, blots and nuts, tie rods, beading of rails, carrying of materials and their storage. Track laying and proper ballasting and drainage. Laying of switches 
left hand and right hand turn outs, bypasses, 
curves, crossing (various types), fixing of rollers/pulleys and their maintenance. Grade of track, super elevation of curves, check rails, bending of rails in case of electric loco track, anchoring of track on steep gradients. 
 
Installation of Runaway switches, drop warricks, step blocks, jazz rails re-railers and other safety contrivances, signaling code, use of manholes.  
Dangers from runaway tubs, haulage, 
derailments. Dangers associated with track lying near waterlogged old workings and fire/explosion area, proper use of safety lamps, workmanship norms. 
 
Clearance between tracks and roadway sides governing the statutory requirement.    24 12 
2. Ventilation 
(Bratticing 
Gang) Purpose of ventilation, introduction to mode 
of occurrence of different gases and their 
physiological effects. Intakes, return, 18 9 
 
 changes therein. Tools, Ventilation materials 
and appliances, air lock, doors, aircrossings, regulators, stopping. Erection and withdrawal 
of brattice and ventilation tubing airtighten as 
thereof, maintenance of brattices, erection of brattice at junctions. Ventilation of cavities. Testing of roof/sides before erecting brattices/ ventilation tubes. Ventilation arrangements in special circumstances, 
workmanship norms. 
3. Attendants of 
fan (including 
auxiliary & 
booster fans.) Construction of fan, its accessories, 
operation, voltage reading on switch board meters and watergauge. Danger board meters and waterguage. Danger from sparks, electrostatic charges, overheating of motors etc. no smoking in fan house/fan drift. 
Earthing of fan casing bedplates of motors. 
Lubrication, maintenance of starters. Fire fighting equipment, its use and storage. First aid In case of electric shock. Standing orders/Instructions in the event of stoppage 
of fan. Fencing. Dangers from lose outer 
clothing. Recirculation of air, dangers therein. Reversal of fan. Precaution against bad roof sides. Mine gases action in the event of detection of gas. 18 9 
 
4 Persons 
employed on 
installation 
repair and 
maintenance of 
machines. Duties, Tools, Preparation of site, 
Organisaion Requisition of materials 
Common troubles and remedies preventive 
maintenance schedules, Effect of moistures dust head of motors. Earthing General conditions in a mine. Signaling code, laying of signaling system, fire extinguishing materials equipment and their use. First aid 
in case of electric shock. Dangers from gas. 
Applicable regulations. Duties under emergency organisation. 24  12 
5. General 
Mazdoor Persons employed in Bailing, transport of 
materials, line packing and cleaning etc. Drainage, Handling transport and storage of materials, house keeping cleaning of 
roadways and loading of collected waste etc. 
art of ballasting haulage track, signaling code, general precautions and applicable regulations. 18 9 
 
6 Tyndals Persons employed of lifting/transport/shifting 
of heavy materials and equipment duties. 
Lifting and handing tackles, art of lifting and 
handling materials with stress on personal safety, transport and manipulation of materials and machinery. Protective equipment, safety belt, boots, leg guard and helmet Signaling code, workmanship norms. 
Installations and shifting of pipes, cables, 
rope, buntons and other shaft equipment, switch 
gear, haula ge coal- cuttin g machines, 25  18 
 
 conveyor, motors pumps etc. Manipulation of 
wire rope during installation/ replacement.  
7. Coal 
cutting/drilling 
machine crew. Details of machines and its operation, proper 
use and care of machine and cables, picks, 
bits, sharpening,, shaping, picks laying, 
oiling/greasing of various parts.  Precautions against falls/gas/coal dust, wet cutting, drilling method, drilling pattern, common troubles and remedies. Dangers 
from cutting/ drilling in stone band, warning 
to persons, fleeting of coal cutting machine on gradient, keeping machinery reasonably free from dust. Applicable regulations. 36  18 
8 Attendants of 
Haulage/Convey
ors. Details of machinery and its accessories, 
operating thereof, operation of voltage readings on switch-board meters if any, 
dangers from sparks, overheating of 
machinery. Lubrication, maintenance of starters, tools, brakes. Fire fighting equipment, its use and storage, first aid in case of electric shock. Earthing of bed plates 
of engine and motor, precautions in haulage 
room, fencing, dangers of lose outer clothing, emergency/personal light, signaling code including emergency etc, Code, hauling capacity, type of clutch condition of rope, indicators for travel of rope, speed at 
gradient and curves. Conveyor- type, use, 
spillage sequence control, dangers from stationary rollers, machinery to be kept reasonably free from Oil/grease and coal dust, Regulations. 24  12 
9 Cleaning/wetting
/stone dust-
barriers/ 
watering-gangs, 
stone-dusting. Coal dust, how produced, hazards such as 
fire, explosions and Pheumoconsis, purpose 
of cleaning and wetting/stone during. Tools, 
properties of various stone dust, wetting agents, Methods of wetting blasted Coal/roof/floor/sides of wetting supports etc. Quantity of stone dust required per unit length of roadways, frequency of dusting/art 
of stone dusting. 
 Introduction to stone dust barriers, how to load shelves, quantity per shelf. Zones and sub-zones, collection samples along 
roadway, transport and storage of stone 
dust. Workmanship norms. 24   12 
10. Stowing Gang Purpose of stowing materials 
stowing/packing, methods, tools and accessories their use, transport and storage, types of pipe & their suitability for different locations, joints and packing, pipe layout, 
lying of pipelines. 
 Sand and water ratio, 
pipe jams and how to 24   12 
 
 deal with them pipe cutting during stowing 
operations, erections and salvaging of barricades, stowing signals, stowing 
efficiency, pipe wear, safe wall thickness, 
how to test, method of changing/turning pipes.. Working of mixing chamber locations of leakage and jams rate of stowing, workmanship norms. 
11. Pick Miners. Tools- How to maintain them, art of cutting 
coal, method/ arrangement for coal cutting at 
height, stability thereof, Cutting of 
roof/floor/side coal cutting for footpaths manholes/drainage/ stopping etc. Method of carrying coal to the loading points without leaving behind the personal light, bit size lumps not to be handled or loaded, proper 
way to load tubs so as to give the required 
amount of coal per tub, handing and manipulation of tubs, dangers from overhangs, effects of band lighting and dust.. Dangers from electric cables, testing of roof 
& sides. 
  24   12 
12. Trammers. Construction of tubs/coupling/attachments 
between a rope or locomotive and a tub or set or train of tubs etc./clips for endless, haulage, use thereof. Haulage contrivances 
and there operation, signals, signal code, 
short circuiting troubles there-in, use of manholes.  Uncontrolled movement of tubes and precautions, use of sprags and drag. 
Warning to persons likely to be endangered, 
coupling/ uncoupling on gradients, handling of tubs from and to cages, tipping of tubs, negotiating curves, curves, causes of derailments, rerailing of derailed tubs, marking on defective tubs, precautions while 
pushing/pulling the tubes, safety 
contrivances such as stop block runaway switch. Switches, jazz rails, re-railers, turnouts etc. 24  12 
13. Loaders. 
 How to use a shovel, shoveling of material in 
case of high heaps, big lumps not be carried 
or loaded into tubs, proper filling of baskets 
and tubs, dangers associated with entering disused/fenced workings, entering the site of blasting without the express instructions of shotfirer/ officials, not heeding to warning of impending collapse/airblast/bump, Not to  
dislodge supports while loading, robbing of 
pillars, overhangs effects of bad lighting & coal dust. Different ways of over gang baskets, workmanship norms. 24   12 
 
 14. Crane Operators 
(including 
mobile crane 
operators) Description of Diesel and Petrol Engine and 
their starting. Type of ropes and relative strength. Correct Selection of Slings and 
securing heavy parts for lifting. Effect of 
group slope while lifting. Heavy parts and choosing correct angle of Crane Boom. Types of shackles and V Bolts and their use.  Starting of Electric Motors and mechanism of 
transmission of Power. Speeds while 
travelling with leads up.  Operation of different levels and lowering of materials.  
Proper signals and their correct 
interpretation. Inspection of crane, slings, shackles before starting work.  Use of warning bells and application of safety device, emergency brakes. 
 
Bye laws in force. 24   12 
15. Drill Operators. General Knowledge about Drilling Machines 
Diesel Engines, Electric Motors and compressors.  
Lubrication system of Diesel Engine and drill 
safety devices fitted on compressors, and their maintenance in safe working order, Location of faults in engine, compressors,  Greasing different parts of machines, 
inspection of machine and power cables 
before starting work. Checking of water and oil temperature, minor repairs and adjustments and use of correct tools, Leveling of Drill Machines & operation of different layers. Correct sequence of 
operation of different levers. 
 Transmissions of compressed air from compressor to Drill head. Location of faults in running machines. Hydraulic system and its 
principle. setting up of drill machines on 
steep slopes.  Selection of proper rotation speed and effect excessive speeds on bit life. Grinding machines and Grinding Wheels, Correct 
grinding of Bits. Different types of wear on 
bits and general precaution to bits life. Danger from working defective machines. Correct selection and use of tools. Dangers from loose house joints and defective Houses. 36 12 
 
  
Need of discipline and punctuality. Company's rules. Standing orders Bye-laws 
in force at the mine organisation and General 
safety.      
 
   
16. Loco Drivers. General Knowledge about Engine and 
electric motor. Transmission of power. Different Gears and relative speeds.  
Lubrication and cooling system of Diesel 
Engines. Different Types of Brakes and Basic principles. Sequence of starting. Locomotive Inspection of Locomotives before starting works. Minor repairs and 
adjustments to Brakes and it's checking. Use 
of correct tools Location of faults in Running Loco.  Types of crossing and switch. Types of signals. Loco speeds in shunting operations 
and type of wagon couplings. Railway siding 
rules. Use of warning Bells and safety devices provided in Locomotion for safe operations.  Types of fire extinguishers and their use. 
Danger due to overspeeding. Loose shunting 
General safety Marshalling Yard. Discipline and punctuality. Company's rules. Standing order. Bye-laws in force in Mine. Mine organisation and General Safety. Use of protective equipment. Duties of locodriver. 
Precaution in shunting operation. Loose 
shunting. 36   18 
  
 
17. Dozer, Loader 
operators. Pay General knowledge of working parts in 
Dozers. Payloaders. Different types of 
Generals a Tranmission of power.  
 
Lubrication system. Battery and Dynamo connections. Location of fault in running equipment.  Inspection of machine before starting works. 
Travelling speeds, steering mechanism 
Checking oil levels and water temperatures Road signs and working in congested places like stock 
piles, below dan gerous overhan gs, 36   24 
 
 side clearance and over head clearances. 
 Filling and Dozing of tracks, Dozing on down 
slopes. Toeing of Heavy trailers. Use of 
correct sling and links. Tightening of loose Nuts and Bolts and use of correct tools. Parking of Dozers. Risks involved in working on defective machine and safety precautions in Dozing near Banks, Bench edges, Bye -
laws in force. 
18. Dumper 
Operators. General knowledge about Diesel and petrol 
engines and their working parts. Different types of gears and transmission of power. Hydraulic system in Dumpers. Need of proper Lubrication and its checks. Correct Air pressure in tyres and its effect on life of 
tyres. Different levers provided in Dumpers. 
Correct sequence of starting and stopping engine. Lifting jacks. Engine cooling system, Detection of faults in running (Dumper) Engine. Brakes and its principle. Correct 
application of Brakes and use of other safety 
devices provided.  Driving Rules. Road signs and signals. Defective driving precautions at Tipping points and correct placing of Dumpers at 
shovels. General inspection of Dumpers 
before starting work and precise reporting of any defect found during operation Parking of Dumpers. Emergency Brakes. Danger in driving defective Dumpers, dangers in overspeeding. Use of Re-tarders of down 
slopes. Bye laws in force.  36   24 
19. Shovel 
Operators. General knowledge about various working 
parts in a Shovel like Diesel Engines, Motors Generators. Transformers. Principles of friction. Different types of Ropes, clutch, and Brakes. Different operating levers, steering mechanism in shovels and steering shovels 
on slopes. Crawling speeds and precaution 
during crawling on slopes, Minor adjustment to Brake and Clutch. Bands and use of correct tools. Greasing and oiling of different parts. Periodical checking of lubricating oil, 
Water temperature in Diesel operated 
shovels.  Correct sequence of operation and dangers involved in running defective machine and Safety Precautions. Protective devices as 
Electrical units, their working and re-setting 
the same, Importance of earthing electrical motors, Generators, Transformers and other apparatus. Minimum working voltage and maximum working currents. 36   24 
 
  
Danger from defective electric cables and careless handling of electric cables, Correct 
method of operation and its effect on 
efficiency. Safety precautions and use of safety devices provided in shovel. Danger from Explosives digging in vicinity of Misfired shots. Bylaws in force. 
20. Persons 
employed in 
management of 
materials  
( Stores) Proper stocking of materials, storage of 
inflammable materials like. Acids, Belt, 
Solution, Grease, Oil Handling of Heavy 
parts, types of slings, ropes and their correct application and code of signals. Storage of Electric motors Batteries. Types and other articles which may deteriorate due to improper storing in humid Atmosphere. Need 
of good house keeping. 
 Dangers from naked light. Types of Fire Extinguishers and their proper use. Danger from inadequate lighting, storage of materials 
in piles, using of Gas Cylinder ( for welding.) 24   12 
21. Welders & Gas 
Cutters. Basic principle of Gas and Arc welding. 
Various forms of welding. Ways and means of avoiding slag inclusion. Stresses induced due to welding. Regulating the medium of welding according to the needs. Detecting and avoiding defects arising out of improper 
welding on steel, Aluminum, Brass and cast 
Iron.  Selections of correct welding equipment, pressure welding rods. Drazing of non-ferrous materials like copper, Brass, tubes, 
Inherent dangers in job and safety 
precaution. Use of corr5ct tools. Safety precautions while welding in confined places like crusher bottoms and fuel tanks. Welding in shafts and working belowground, precaution, use of protective equipment.  36   24 
22. Fitter Helpers. 
 Different types of spanners and their use. 
Types of jacks (Mechanical and Hydraulic) 
Greasing and oiling of machine parts Cleaning of welding surfaces. Identification of various Lubrication and other oils Handling of wire ropes, slings, and correct applications. 
Risks involved in use of wrong tools. Wrong 
Lubrication and working on running engines, flywheels and Belts and precautions. 36   18 
23. Fitters. 
Electricians etc. Management may propose Syllabus as 
period requirements allotted. 70 36 
24. Members of a 
Team/Composite 
group of workers. Where any worker performs the job related to 
more than one class/king of workers, he shall undergo the job training for the specified 
number of days for each of such class/kind of 
worker. See 
Syllabus  
 
                             
 
ANNEXURE   - 'G' 
On the Job Training For Apprentices 
 
Outside Apprenticeship Act . 
 
General: 
 
1.Scheme : 
  Apprentices are appointed in the Company outside Trade Apprenticeship Act, 1951 mostly for acquisition of surface land for Mining purpose and due to voluntary retirement and other schemes. Such Apprentice is now generally taken for a period of one year under certain terms and conditions. They have to be given exhaustive "On The Job" Training in various identified trades in order to utilise them against natural wastage of manpower in the company. In this 
connection, reference is invited to the letter No.ECL/HQ/CPO/C-6B/80/154 dated 23
rd/26th 
February 1980 from the Chief Personnel officer, Sanctoria.  
1. Areas Identified For Training : 
 
AREA SUB- AREA 
(A) Conventional/Longwal/Mining (h) As Mining Sirdar Asst. in Longwall 
faces. 
(ii) As ventilation Asst. (iii) As machinist/Fitter Helper. (iv) As Electrician Helper. (v) As stowing Mazdoor/Asst. 
(vi) As support Man. 
(vii) As conveyor Fitter Helper. (viii) As Multi-skilled face worker. (ix)  As Dusting and sampling Organisation      Mazdoor. (x) A Civil Engineering Underground 
     Organisation Mazdoor. 
 
(b) Scraper Mining (i) As Mining Sirdar Asst. In scraper 
faces. 
(ii) As Multi-skilled face worker. (iii) As Conveyor/Haulage Fitter helper. (iv) As solid Blasting Mazdoor. 
(c) Opencast Mining (j) As Auto-Fitter Helper. 
(ii) As Auto-Electrician Helper. (iii) As Lubricating Asst. (iv) As Dumper/Dozer/Shovel Operator/Drill    Operator Helper. (v) As workshop Fitter-helper. 
(vi) As Mining Sirdar Asst. 
in opencast Benches. 
(d) Mine Surveying (i) As survey Mazdoor. 
(ii) As Chainman. (iii) As Tracer. (iv) As Draughtsmen.  
 
 
 (e) Office Management. (i) As General clerk. 
(ii) As P.F.Clerk. (iii) As Bill clerk. 
(iv) As pay clerk. 
(v) As Stenographer/Typist. (vi) As Judicial/Law Asst. 
(f) Boiler maintenance (i) As Boiler Attendant. 
(ii) As Boiler Fitter Helper. 
(g) Vertical Transport maintenance (i) As Winding Engine Fitter Helper 
(ii) As Winding Engine Operator Asst. (iii) As suspension Gear Fitter Helper. 
(iv) As Shaft fitting Fitter Helper. 
(v) As Welder Helper. 
(h) Horizontal Transport Maintenance (i) As Haulage Fitter Helper. 
(ii) As Rope technician Asst. (iii) As Haulage safety devices Fitter 
Helper. 
(iv) As Conveyor Fitter/Operator Asst. 
(v) As TrackLayer. 
 
(i) Mining Machinery Maintenance (i) As Fitter helper. 
(ii) As Electrician Helper. (iii) As Welder Helper. 
(j) Blasting (i) As explosive Carrier. 
(ii) As Clay Cartridge Mazdoor. 
(iii) As Magazine Asst. Mazdoor. 
(iv) As Driller. (v) As water spray/Stone dusting 
Mazdoor. 
(vi) As Shotfiring asst. 
(k) Health and Sanitation. (i) As Dresser Asst. 
(ii) As Compounder Asst. 
(iii) As staff Nurse Asst. 
(iv) As Health /Sanitation Asst. (v) As vaccinator Asst. (vi) As X-ray, ECG, Health Laboratory 
Equipment Asst. 
(vii) As Clinical Laboratory Asst. 
(viii) As Sweeping Asst. 
(l) Laboratory. (i) As Analyst/Chemist Asst. 
(ii) As Laboratory Asst. (iii) As Laboratory Clerk. 
(m) Tele-communication. (i) As Telephone Operator Asst. 
(ii) As Telephone Mechanic Asst. (iii) As lineman. 
(n) Motor Vehicles. (j) As Motor Mechanic/Driver-Helper or 
      Khalasi. 
(o) Coal/Sand Loading, Dumping. (i) As U.G Loader. 
(ii) As Sand Gatherer/Dumper/Loader. (iii) As Pit  Munshi Asst. 
 The above identified Areas and Sub-Areas may be covered by the appointed apprentices in the following trades qualification wise, age-wise gender wise.   
 
  
Trades Qualifications Age Group Male/Female 
(1) Mining B.Sc.H.S.(Sc.) 18-30 years Male. 
(2) Surveying H.S.(Sc.)Land 
Sursveyor, Civil 
Draughtsman. 18- 30 years Male 
(3) Commercial S.F.(Hu),H,S.(Ha)B.A.
B.Com, LLB, Typist. 18- 35 years Male and Female. 
(4) Mechanical H.S.(Sc),S.F.(Sc) 
L.M.E.and aboveClass VIII.       -do-  - do - 
(5) Electrical S.F.(Sc),H.S.(Sc) 
L.E.E.and above ClassVIII.      -do-   -do- 
(6) HEMM H.S.(sc) B..Sc.L.M.E., 
L.E.E.and above 
Class VIII.    -do-   -do- 
(7) Para-Medical H.S.,B.Sc.(Bio), SF 
and above ClassVIII   -do-   Male and Female. 
(8) 
Telecommunication S.F.,H.S.(Sc)and 
below class VIII   -do-  -do- 
(9)Laboratory H.S.(Sc),B.Sc. 
B.Sc(Bio).  -do-  -do- 
(10) Automobile S.F.and above Class 
VIII.  -do-  Male. 
(11) Loading Below Class VIII and 
Illiterates.  -do-  -do- 
 
 
3.Recruitment & Allotment of Trades: 
 
     An Expert Committee consisting of: 
 (i) Representative of G.M, All Areas. 
(ii) (ii) Representative of Personnel Dept. of Hqrs. 
(iii) (iii) Representative of the Department al Head of Hqrs. (iv) (iv) Representative of GM (Training).  Which may be subjected to be changed suitably if deemed necessary will be formed by the Area Training Officer and this committee so formed at the Area level of the Company will assess the 
candidature of the recruited apprentices by the personnel Dept. This Committee will allot 
particular trade to the Apprentice (s) Specifying Area and Sub-Areas of deployment as identified in relation to the need of the company. Appointment letter preferably of the proforma as in Schedule 'A' is to be issued to the candidates. On joining, the candidate shall submit a joining report to the Manager/Agent Colliery/Project along with three copies of bio-date forms as 
Schedule 'B'. On receiving bio-data forms at the Area level, these require to be distributed to 
G.M.(Training), Hqrs. Personnel Manager of the Area, Colliery Manager for record.  
4.Master Register: 
 
             One Master Register shall be maintained detailing all the requisite of the bio-data from at 
the Colliery level, area Level and Hqrs.(Training) level, During official inspection, officers of the 
Hqrs. Training may demand the same.  
 
 
 
 5.Duration: 
 
             The duration of the training period as Apprentices will normally be for one year, which 
may be extended to further six months. After the expiry of the Apprenticeship period, the 
apprentice will continue their training for 2 to 3 years till they are competent enough had develop sufficient skill up responsible assignments.  
6.Training Hours: 
 
               Apprentices will be exposed to (a) 5- days 'On the Job Training' at the colliery/ project 
under the guidance of Training Guide/ Asst. Manager/Engineer (b)1-day class room theoretical training at Regional Training Institutes, Poniati/Burradhemo or at V.T.. Centers of Mining Training Institute, Poniati. It will take little bit time to cater theoretical training at these Institutes which under consideration of the Training Wing of E.C.L.  
2. Training period Break Down : 
(a) Total Training Days available 312 
(b) Initial General Vocational Training under V.T.Rule 6 as per Schedule C. 30 
(c) Class Room Induction Training days at V.T. Centers as per Schedule D. 5 
(d) Class Room Training for First Aid to the standard of St.John Ambulance 
Association as per Schedule E at the V.T.Center.  5 
  
(e) Class Room Training for Gas Testing vide V.T.Rule 17 and as per Schedule F at the V.T.Center. 6 
(f) Class Room Theoretical Training one day/week as per block Syllabus 
Schedule G (to be provided at the Inst.) 40 
(g) 'On the job Training' Days as per Syllabus Schedule H. 226. 
 
The total training period does not include days for leave/sick/ holidays. 
 Female Apprentices recruited under this scheme may be given only training under V.T.Rule 6 (I). Induction training, First Aid training at the V.T.Centres and 'On The Job Training'.  
8. Maintenance of Diary : 
 The apprentices should maintain a diary as per schedule HH of their practical training. Maintenance of a Diary for everyday of their work is necessary to enable the apprentices to know the program of their work to get proper guidance from their supervisors/Engineers/managers/ Training Guides in their respective discipline/trades allotted to them. The Diary is to be filled in 
duplicate one for the Office Manager/ Training guides, one for the office of the Area Training 
Officer.  In addition, the Apprentices should maintain Diary of the daily work in detail in a book kept in their possession, which may require to be produced before the Officer of the Training Department 
during inspection. 
 9. Trade Test or Suitability Test :  Trade Test shall be conducted one month before the completion of training.The above test in the from of aptitude test/viva voice will be conducted by the Area Training Officer with the guidance of 
same Committee as in para 3. 
    
 
 Basis of Assessment: 
(1) Report form the Manager 25 
(2) Report form V.T. Manager. 25 qualified marks- 
40. 
(3) Viva-voice/Aptitude Test 50 
 The final report of the assessment shall be forwarded by the Area Training Officer to the 
personnel Department for necessary action.  
10. Scope and Standard of General Vocational Training at V.T.Centre.  
 
V.T.Rule- 6. 
 
Every person proposed to be employed in a mine on the surface or in open cast workings other 
than a person who has held any such previous employment shall before he is so employed under-go a course of theoretical and gallery training as specified in the First Schedule provided that in respect of such class or kind of work as the DGMS may, from time to time, by notification specify every person proposed to be employed thereto shall before he is so employed undergo a further course of practical training on actual operations for a period of not less than 12 working 
days. 
 (2) Every person proposed to be employed below ground in a mine (other than a person who has held any such previous employment) shall before he is so employed undergo :-  
(a) A course of theoretical and gallery training as specified in the second Schedule and  
 (b) A course of Practical training on actual operations for a period of not less than 12 working 
days. 
 Provided that every such person proposed to be employed in a mine wherein safety lamps are 
required to be used (hereinafter called gassy mine) shall before he is so employed, undergo a 
further course of training about the dangers of inflammable gas and method of dealing with the same as specified in the Third Schedule.  
11. Induction Training  : 
 
A schedule in Schedule J is appended which is to be followed for 5 days Induction Training at the 
V.T.Centres. Faculty Members for conducting the above course shall be paid honorarium by the V.T.Manager from the V.T.Budget. On completion of the program, a report shall be made to the General Manager (Training).  
 12. Absorption as Employee  : 
 
As and when an apprentice under this scheme is absorbed as an employee, a report in writing by the Personnel Dept. At the Area level is to be made to the G.M. (Training) & P.M. Man-power cell Hqrs. For their record starting the capacity and place of posting. 
 13. Training in First-Aid. 
 
On completion of First-Aid training as per schedule E, V.T. Manager shall arrange in collaboration with Colliery Medical Officer for their examination in First-Aid with Department of DGMS, Sitarampur or with St.John Ambulance Association, Before the apprentices complete their 
training, they are definitely required to pass the above examination. Faculty cost for conducting 
the above training shall be borne from the training budget of the colliery.  
 
 14. Training in Gas Testing: 
 
On completion of the Class Room Training on Gas Testing as per Schedule F, the Apprentices 
required to possess the Gas Testing Certificate shall appear at the Gas Testing Examination 
under Mines Act, 1952 which will be organised by the VT Manager at his V.T.Centre, Even if it required to conduct tutorial classes for the purpose, VT Manager shall arrange the same. Faculty cost for conducting the above training shall be borne from the training budget of the colliery.  
15. Class Room Theoretical Training : 
 
Class Room Training on theoretical subject as per Block Schedule G shall be conducted at MiningTraining School, Poniati, Regional Training Institute, Ponati / Burradhemo. On request from the Principal of the above Institute, The Area. Training Officer shall sponsor candidates for the above training 1-day/week 40-class days having two sessions/day in a year will be arranged by 
the above Institute. Candidates having Automobile trade will be sent to Local Automobile Training 
School for theoretical training by the Area Training Officer. Finance for such training will be borne by the Area from their training budget. Candidates of telecommunication trade shall seek the theoretical training conducted by the telecommunication dept. At Hqrs. for which Area Training Officer shall make necessary arrangement. For the time being no theoretical training for the candidates having para-medical, Laboratory, Loading trades can be arranged. They shall week 
only 'On the Job Training. 
 16. On the Job Training.'  Training Guide/ Asst. Manager/Engineer shall guide the trainees to secure effective training as 
per Block Syllabus Schedule II. 
  
SCHEDULE  - 'A' 
 
EASTERN COALFIELDS LIMITED. 
 
(A subsidiary of Coal India Limited) 
 
OFFICE OF THE GENERAL MANAGER/PROJECT OFFICER------ AREA/PROJECT 
 
P.O.    -----------    Dist.----------------------- Pin------------------------- 
 Sub: Scheme for engagement as Apprentice under Land Loser's Scheme vide Circular No----- Dated------------  To 
Sri 
S/O  Village-----------------------P.O.----------------------  Dist.--------------------------State ---------------- 
 
 Dear Sir,  In pursuance of the above scheme of the Company, the undersigned is pleased to offer you an appointment as ---------------------- Apprentice in this Organisation on the following terms and 
 
 conditions specially in the development. Area/Sub-Area --------------------- Colliery/Workshop from -
-----------------------------.  
1. That you will work as a ----------------- apprentice for a period of one year. 
 2. That you will be paid a consolidated stipend of Rs.130/- (Rupees one hundred and thirty only) 
per month. 
 3. That after satisfactory completion of your apprenticeship period you will have to appear 
before the Selection Committee for a trade test for consideration of your absorption as ---------
-----------. 
 4. That if during the above period of apprenticeship, your performance, behavior and attitude 
are not found satisfactory, your appointment will be terminated without any notice and without assigning any reason whatsoever. 
 
5. That you will to make your own arrangement on accommodation for which you will not be 
entitled for any house rent. 
 6. That you are not entitled to any benefits engaged by the employees of Eastern Coalfields 
Limited. 
 
7. That you are subject to transfer for posting in any of the colliery/workshop of the company.  8. That this appointment will be subject to your being found medically fit by our medical officer,--
------------------------ 
 
9. That you will surrender your Employment Exchange Registration card to the undersigned for 
return to the Employment Exchange Officer. 
 10, That in case of any dispute arisen about the ownership of the land, your appointment as Apprentice will immediately be suspended till firm settlement of the dispute. 
 
. 11.That during the above apprenticeship period, you will not be entitled to join any other. In Company/Out Company training program unless deems it necessary by the training department.  12.that any leave/sick granted to you will be at the discretion of the management. 
 
10. 13. That you are required to report to the Agent/ Manager,--------------------Colliery/Workshop 
at 8.00 A.M. on --------------------------- for 'On the Job' training under the Training Guide/ Asst.Manager/ Engineer strictly adhering to the block syllabus Schedule --------------- of the training plan. Therefore, you are required to report he Manager. -------------- Vocational 
Training Center for Initial/General Vocational training under Mines Rules and Induction 
Training. 
 If the above terms and conditions acceptable to you, you are to give in writing stating the date of joining and fill (in the attached bio-data form in triplicate.  
Signature of the General Manager/ Project Officer. 
   
  
 
 
 JOINING REPORT 
  
To  
The General Manager, -----------------------Area.      (THROUGH PROPER CHANNEL0 
 
  Dear Sir,  Under reference to your appointment offer No.------------- dated ----------- I hereby solemnly declare that I shall abide by the terms and conditions stated therein. I am joining on the 
forenoon/afternoon of dated…   At …     Colliery as … Apprentice. Three copies of filled in Bio-
date from a duty verified by the Manager …  Colliery/Project are being sent to you for reference to my service file.   Date …                                                                                                 Signature of the Apprent ice. 
 
c.c.     1. Personnel Manager------------- Area/Project.  
2. Agent/ Manager --------------------Colliery/ Project. 
 3. Area Safety-cum- Training Officer----------------------- Area.  4.Finance Manager ------------------------------Area/Project.  
5.Manpower Cell, ECL.Hqrs, Sanctoria. 
 6.General Manager (Training), M.T.I. Ratibati.  7.Service File.  
8.Office file. 
 9.Regional Employment Exchange-with a request to note that Sri ---------------------regd.No. --------------------------------- Has been recruited as -----------------from ------------------.  
 
     
 
     
 
 
 SCHEDULE 'B- I' 
 
 
 
 
BIO - DATA FORM 
 
 
1. Name ( In Block letters) 
 
2. Father's Name  3. Name and address of the owner of the land 
Purchased by the Company.  
4. Trade Area of Deployment 
  5. Qualification  6. Place of Posting  
7. Date of Joining 
 8. Date of Completion of training.  9. Whether SC/ST 
 
10. If absorbed, capacity and place of posting.  11. Staff No./Unique Man No.(If any)  12. Scheme under which recruitment is made 
 
13. Employment Exchange Regd.No.  14. Specimen Signature.   
 
 
                SCHEDULE  - C- I 
 
First Schedule under V.T.Rule 6(1) 
 Course of Theoretical and Gallery training for surface and opencast Workers.  Ist Day (Surface)  Talk: Organisation time keeping, the need for discipline and punctuality, other matters of 
general interest. 
 Training in first aid.  Visit: Attendance room, pit head bath, canteen, Rest Shelter Crèche.  
2
nd Day (surface) 
 
  
Talk: Rules. Standing orders etc. in force at the mine, safety in the vicinity of surface machinery. 
 
Training in first aid:  Visit: Tramways and sidings, Haulage rooms, winding room, Boilers Electrical Gears, Workshop.  
3
rd Day : (Surface) 
 Talk: Benching in quarries, Dressing of overhangs, Fencing, First aid and Hygiene.  Training in first aid.  
Visit: Quarries, Medical Centers. 
 Practical work: Tub Manipulation, coupling tramming, lockering, re-railing of tubs.  4
th Day (Surface): 
 
Talk: Shotfiring and Safety regulations. 
 Training in first aid.  Visit: Practical demonstration of taking shelter etc. 
 
Practical work: Building of sand bags stopping.  5
th Day: Talk: Legislation and duties of work persons. 
 Training in first aid. 
 
Visit:  "What 's wrong?  Practical work: Laying of tracks.  6
th Day: 
 
Talk: Mine Official and their duties, Oral test.   
                          SCHEDULE   - C -II 
 
Under 2
nd Schedule of V.T.Rule (2) aa : 
 
Course of Theoretical and Gallery training for workers belowground.  Ist Day: 
 
Talk: Method of transport belowground, signaling, man holes and other safety appliances on haulage roads.  Training in first aid  
 
 
  
Visit: Underground pit bottom, travelling road-way, second outlet, haulage and tramming roadways, stations and fencing belowground. 
 
Practical work: Tub manipulation, coupling, tramming lockering, re-railing of tubs and signaling, laying of pipes and track.  2
nd Day: 
 
Talk: Face work, roof control, testing of roof, support, regulations, first aids any Hygiene. 
 Training in first aid:  Visit: Underground working face, underground latrines, first aid stations.  
Practical work: Prop-setting, chock building and withdrawal. 
 3
rd Day: 
 Talk: Ventilation, Lighting, Legislation and duties of work persons.  
Training in first aid: 
 Visit: Underground ventilation and lighting devices, Fan house, air crossing, stopping regulator doors etc.  
Practical work: Erecting brattices, ventilation of blind ends, practical demonstration of fire 
fighting device, detection of noxious gases.  4
th Day: 
 Talk: Shotfiring and safety regulations, Causes and preventing of fire underground, care of 
lamps. 
 Training in first aid:  Visit: underground practical demonstration of taking shelter etc.  
Practical work: Building of sand bag stopping. 
 5
th Day: 
 Talk: Mine gases (particularly carbon monoxide, carbondioxide and methane) and dangers 
therefrom testing for the same or, General revision. 
 Training in First aid:  Practical work: Cleaning of galleries.  
6
th Day: Talk: Mine official and their duties, oral test. 
 Visit: Underground "What's wrong"?    
               
 
  
  SCHEDULE  - C  -   III 
 
 
Third Schedule under V.T. Rule (2) b:  
 
Course of special additional training for entrants to gassy mines.  Ist Day: 
 
Talk: Dangers of inflammable gas: Effects of inflammable gas in different percentages. Gas caps, Difference between combustion and explosion. After damp-its effect Method of testing for inflammable gas with flame safety lamp.   
 
Demonstration: Gas caps. Difference between combustion and explosion.  Visit: Visit to safety lamp cabin to see how lamps are maintained, cleaned etc. and to study construction of safety lamps.  
2
nd Day: 
 Talk: Principle of construction of flame safety lamps and of flameproof electrical equipment. Assemblies of flame safety lamps. Care of safety lamps during use. Dangers of opening or tampering with safety lamp. 
 
Demonstration: Effects of wire gauge on flame.  Practical work: Testing for gas.  Visit: Visit to workshop to see flame -proof equipment. 
 
3
rd Day: 
 Talk: Duties of workers in gassy mine and where inflammable gas exists, Dangers of smoking, Contrabands.  
Visit: Visit (1) to lamp cabin to see arrangements for checking lamps before issue and after 
receipt and (2) to the mine entrances to see arrangement for checking safety lamps and for searching of contrabands.  Practical work: Cleaning and assembling safety lamps. 
 
4
th Day: 
 Talk: Explosion and health hazards from dust. Methods of suppressing dust. Water spraying. Cleaning and stone dusting wet cutting. Wet drilling. Use of respirators. Occurrences of inflammable gas. Methods of removing gas. Necessity for good ventilation at the face. 
Ventilation devices. 
 Visit: Underground visit to see dust suppression arrangements and measures. Surface and underground visit to see ventilation devices. Practical work: Erection of bratices. Ventilation of blind ends.  
 
 
  
5th Day: 
 
Talk: Dangers of shotfiring in gassy mines. Precaution. Underground visit to see shotfiring. 
 6
th Day: 
 General revision. Oral test.  
 
 
                           SCHEDULE   - 'D' 
 
 
                    CLASS ROOM INDUCTION TRAINING 
  Venue:   Vocational Training Center  Days:     (five) 
I Ist session 2
nd session 3rd session 4th session 
Ist day Organisaion in ECL the 
Area level. Roll & functions 
of different departments/ Safety in Mining. Safety in Mining. 
2nd day Disciplinary procedure. Disciplinary 
procedure. Productivity Film show in 
material handling. 
3rd day Self development Communication. Class study in 
communication.  
Film show in 
F.Aid. 
4thday Cost consciousness. Morale with 
motivation. Duties of 
individual. Duties of 
individual/ 
5th Day Vital provisions of 
CMR,M/ACT. Vital provisions 
of M. Rules etc. Film show in F. 
Aid. Film show in 
F.Aid. 
 Note: Each session shall be of 90 (ninety) Minutes duration.   
   SCHEDULE   - 'E' 
 
FIRST AID 
 
Venue Vocational Training Centers. 
 
 Ist session 2
nd session 
 3rd session 4th session. 
 
Ist day. Structure & 
Function of body. Burns & Scales Practice. Practice. 
2nd day. Blood circulation, 
wounds & Haemorrage. Bandages, 
splints etc. Practice. Practice. 
3rd day. Fractures, shock  
& 
unconsciousness. Transport of 
injured 
persons. Practice. Practice. 
4th day. Res piration Mine Artificial Practice. Practice. 
 
 gas poisoning. Respiration & 
Mine Diseases. 
5th day.  Examination. 
    
 
Note: each session is of 90 (Ninety) minutes' duration 
  
   SCHEDULE  -'F' 
 
Eighth Schedule under V.T.Rule 17. 
 
COURSE OF TRAINING IN GAS TESTING 
 (Demonstration to be arranged with every talk and each talk to be followed by discussion. The duration of each talk and discussion to be not less than two hours.)  Ist day talk: 
 
Physical and chemical properties of inflammable gas. Occurrence of inflammable gas. Gas outbursts. Dangers from inflammable gas in different percentages. Difference between combustion and explosion.  
2
nd day talk : 
 Other mine gases. Their properties and effects. After damp its composition and effects.  3
rd day talk " 
 
What makes a safety lamp safe ? Construction and assembly of safety lamps, both of flame and 
electric type. Care of safety lamps. Opening, cleaning, assembling and testing of safety lamps.    4
th day. 
 Methods of testing for inflammable gas with flame safety lamps. Gas caps. Accumulation and 
percentage tests. Precautions where gas present. 
 5
th day. 
 Provisions of regulations relating to safety lamps, and to the presence of inflammable gas. Other means of testing for inflammable gas. 
 
6
th day talk: 
 General revision and discussion.  
 
     
 
   
 
    SCHEDULE   - 'H-I' 
 
BLOCK SYLLABOUS FOR "ON THE JOB TRAINING ' 
                 
 
TRADE:  MINING. 
 
Sl.No. Code Composition Days. 
1. MIN/a General 
Mining (a) Study of plans, geology of the Areas 
no. of Coal Seams. 
 
(b) Aquatinting with surface features. (c)  Accompanying Overman/M.Sirdar 
on their routine inspection and aquatinting with the mine workings. 20 days. 
2. MIN/b Mine 
Surveying. (a) Preparation and tracing of different 
Mines plans. 
(b) (b) Practical surveying & leveling 
with surveying instrument & office calculation. 
(c) (c) Coal depot measurement, 
overburden measurement and 
gallery marking. 20 days. 
3. MIN/c Explosive 
& shotfiring. (a) Study of explosive used in the 
mines magazine, keeping Reserve station, Blasting efficiency, precautions against pilferage & wastage. 
(b) Asst. to shotfirer, studying blasting 
operation, Misfired shots. 
(c) Study of shotfiring tools exploders. (d) Blasting in stone drifts inking shafts, 
opencast blasting, blasting off the solid. 
(e) (e) Pattern of shot holes, drilling & 
blasting. 20 days. 
4. MIN/d Timbering 
& Bratticing. (a) With timber crew- setting of props, 
logs and bars, systematic timbering rules, withdrawal of supports. 
(b) (b) Timbering and special methods 
of supporting weak grounds, wide 
junctions, Incline months. 
(c) (c) Bratticing at the face, its 
transport underground. 
  20 days. 
5. MIN.e Bord & 
pillar 
Development. (d) (a) Study of plans, panel system  
 of development workings, driving of 
galleries, under cutting by C.C.Machine. 20 days. 
6. MIN/f  
Depillaring. (a) A study of the plan of the depillaring 
area, size of the panel and its barrier, building of isolation stopping, arrangements of tracks, Sequence of pillar extraction and line of face. (b) Splitting of pillars, methods of 
extraction, stocking and slicing methods. 30 days. 
 
 (c) Stowing in all details, surveying 
prevention of robbing, drainage. 
7. MIN/g Longwall 
Mining. Layout of longwall district cycle of 
operation, blasting pattern, Gate road-
ways, system of supports, breakage of 
roof. 20 days, 
8. 
 MIN/h scraper, 
Mining. Layout of scraper mining operation, 
scraper haulage multi-skilled workers cycle of operation, 10 days. 
9. MIN/i Opencast 
Mining. (a) Layout of meachanaised O.C.P., 
O.C. Machaneries. Organisation, Coal overburden ratio. 20 days. 
10. MIN/j  Ventilation 
& Mine Gass. (a) Ventilation surveying, Aircrossing, 
stone dust barriers, stone dusting Mine 
air sampling, Mine dust sampling quantity of air V.E.Q. degree of gassiness detection, determination & removal of inflammable and noxious gases, Fire fighting organisation, 
emergency organisation standing 
orders. 36 days. 
11. MIN/k 
Underground Transport & power. The horizontal and vertical transport 
system from the coalface to the siding. Distribution of powers, water percolation, and pumping system of the mine. 10days. 
12. MIN/l workshop. Heat treatment of diff. mining equipment, 
smithy shop, repair jobs of pumps, 
motors etc. 10 days. 
   226 days. 
 
 
    SCHEDULE   - ' H-H' 
 
 
BLOCK SYLLABUS FOR 'ON THE JOB TRAINING' 
 
TRADE:   SURVEYING. 
  
Sl.No. Code Composition 
1. Surv/a General Measurement of coal/overburden. Office calculation. 
Preparation plans & sections, tracing, use of plannimeter, 
use-of different scales etc. Enlargement, Reduction & copying of plans. Study of buildings, fan drift, surface structure sinking shaft haulage and winding engine installation, water reservoir and sand bunker construction and stowing plant layout. 
2.  Surv/b Chain 
surveying, Use of diff. kinds of chains & tapes requisites of chain 
surveying. Reconnaissance, selection of stations, 
carrying out chain triangulation, offsetting, booking, plotting from the field book, limits of error..                            
3. Surv/c Dial Surveying. Use of diff. types of dial, how to read vernier scale, 
centering, leveling construction of vernier Dial, carrying out Dial survey on the surface as well as underground loose needle/ fixed needle surve
ying. Different methods 
 
 of fixed needle surveying. Study of advantage, and 
disadvantages. Borehole & shaft surveying. Extension of center and grade lines. Booking and plotting Test, care, 
maintenance and adjustments of dial. Limits or error.  
 
4. Surv/d Theodolite 
surveying. Use of different kinds of theodolites. Care and 
maintenance. Test and adjustment, diff. Methods of surveying with theodolite and their advantages and disadvantages, calculation and use of rectangular co-ordinates and computation. Limit of error. 
 
 
5. Surv/e Triangulation 
Surveying. Purpose, principles involved, methods of measuring 
angles study of diff. meridian, declination, dip of the needle. 
6. Surv/f True North 
determination. True north line of the colliery. Study of different star, 
determination of the true north line etc. 
7. Surv/g Lvelling & 
countouring. Study of diff. Leveling Instruments & metric staff. Their 
care & maintenance, test and adjustment. Carrying out 
surface and underground leveling work. Spot 
determination of gradient. Calculations of cutting,filling roof ripping. Diff. Methods of contouring, preparation of contour map, subsidence survey, H.F.L. survey, water danger plan etc, Limits of error. 
8. Surv/h Plane Table 
Surveying. Study of plane table surveying. Different methods 
involved. Carrying out plane TABLE SURVEYING. Study 
of cadestral maps. Geological maps etc. 
9. Surv/hh  Correlation Different methods of correlation survey. Its accuracy, 
determination U/G Benchmark. Trijunction pillar.   
10. Surv/j  Miscellaneous. Tachometric survey, Curve laying pit top and pit bottom 
layout. Drainage system of the colliery, construction of buildings, dams and civil engineering works. 
 
   
 
     
 
    
 
     
 
  
 
  SCHEDULE   - 'H-III' 
 
TRADE   :    COMMERCIAL  
 
Sl.No. Code Subject Days. 
1. G.Com/a Recording and Filling, Exercise on 
Maintenance of records, filing system of our organisation. 25 days. 
2. G.Com/b Mail handling & correspondence, Exercise 
on main handling and correspondence maintaining Registers- Diary and despatch registers- Filling and correspondence. 25 days. 
3. G.Com/c Drafting notices: Practice on drafting 
notices of various types and reports. 20 days, 
4. G.Com/d PBX & TELEX: Working knowledge of PBX 
& TELEX. 10 days 
5. G.Com/e Communication & Records: Exercise on 
Telegraphic communications, phonogram, code telegram, savinggram, cypher telegram etc. Maintaining Registers for record of such communications. 20 days. 
6. F.Com/f Rule & Regulations: Exercises of dealing 
with different cases with application of rules and regulations Mines Act, Mines rules, Compensation Act, Conservation Act, Industrial dispute Act, Wage board recommendation, service rules. 20 days, 
7. G.Com/ff Type writing: Practice of Type writing to 
attain a minimum efficiency of 30 w.p.m. 0 days, 
8. S.Com/a Sales & Desptch: Participation in the  job of 
sale/purchase and despatch of coal, timber, plant & machinery. 56 days. 
9 S.Com/b Store keeping & Purchase: Acquaintance 
with the types of store to handle, design and usage of store receipt forms, dummy transactions, Issue & return of materials, 
store registers, forms, code and records. 
Magazine keeping. Issue & return of explosives. 56 days. 
10. S.Com/c. Book-keeping & Accountancy: Entries of 
imprest and petty cash book, Bank Transactions, Trial balance closing stock, 
outstanding expenses, paid expenses, 
depreciation, interest on capital revenues & capital expenditure, distributions of profits, salary sheet, bonus sheet, single entry system, tax calculation, voucher writing promissory notes, bill of exchange, import & 
export procedure. 56 days. 
11. S.Com/d Provident Fund. Filling up forms, 
submission of returns, conduction, maintenance and submission of contribution of cards. 56 days. 
12. S.Com/e. Time keeping: Maintenance of different 
registers under Mines Act, pit mouths  
 
 attendance, piece rate/daily rate wages 
system. Office calculations.  
 
 
Note:  1- 7 will be covered by all as general and Sl.No.8- 12 each will be covered by individual to 
suit their attitude. 
  
   
SCHEDULE   - 'H- IV' 
 
TRADE MECHANICAL 
 
                                                
Sl.No. Code Subject Days. 
1. Mech./a Mannual Metal works skills.  
Safety precaution, marking, chipping, filing, 
sawing, center punching, drilling, revetting, pipe threading & fitting. 20 days. 
2. Mech/b. Machine working skills:  
Plain & step turning thread cutting, taper 
turning, boring grinding of lathe tools, 
surface grinding. 20 days. 
3. Mech/c. Hot working skills. 
Head treatment of tools and component 
parts, normalising, annealing, case hardening simple gas and electric welding. 20 days. 
4 Mech/d Development of basic skills. 
Fitting of male & female parts, Removing/Replacing of broken stands, Replacement/Repairing of belts, checking/repairing of damaged bearings, Replacement of packing glands and seals, Preventive maintenance work, breakdown 
maintenance work. 30 days. 
5. Mech/e Winding Installation equipment: 
Identification of components used in 
conjunction with winding installations, clear under-standing of their functions and essence of mechanical maintenance they need. Dismantling and refitting of safety 
attachments. Lubrication of winding and 
guide ropes and their measurements. Steam joints, change of packing, mounting, fitting and accessories of boilers. Dismantling, and fitting of injectors. 30 days. 
6. Mech./f Pumps & their fittings: 
Diff. types of pumps used in mines, installation, alignment, metal, bearing setting, proper way of gland packing, changing, locating primary troubles, overhauling of pumps. 26 days. 
7. Mech/g. Haulage system : 
Different types of haulage system, 
maintenance and routine checkin g of 20 days. 
 
 haulage ropes. Safety appliances and 
breaking of rope haulage, installation, alignment and extension of conveyors of all 
types. 
8. Mech,/h Coal cutting machine: 
Overhauling and maintenance of Coal 
Cutting Machine.  20 days. 
  
9. Mech,/hh Special operators: 
Track laying, pipe laying shaft fitting, rope 
splicing. Rope capping, winding rope hanging, guide rope changing and 
lubrication. 20 days. 
10. Mech./j Repairing and Replacement: 
Repair of gear box, fluid couplings, driving 
sprocket tailend roller chains, pans & conveyors, coal drill, Dowty props, Hydraulic pulleys, compressor, ventilation fan, Gear box for ropeway transmission, 
Belt conveyor structures, End tipplers etc. 20 days. 
   226 days 
    
 
 
TRADE:   ELECTRICAL /AUTO ELECTRICAL 
 
Sl.No. 
 Code Subject Days. 
1. Ele./aa Basic Hand Tools: 
Use of hand tools, chipping Filing, Drilling, 
Threading, Riveting, positioning, fitting of bolts, nuts & screws. 20 days. 
2. Ele./b. Making of joints: 
Making of joints using single & multi strand 
cables, soldering, House wiring. 20 days. 
3. Ele./c Use of electrical Appliances: 
Use of switches, plugs, sockets, cut-out fuses, regulators, test lamps, primary & Secondary batteries, armatures, voltmeter, meggar, condenser, wire gauge. 30 days. 
4. Ele./d. Running, care and maintenance: 
Generators, A.C.motors & starters, switch gear, 
circuit breakers, transformer switches fuse 
boxes electrical appliances. 20 days. 
5. Ele./e Installation of illumination units: 
Installation of lighting circuits for illumination, 
connection of motors, generators, field regulators, switch boards. 20 days. 
6. Ele./f. Winding of Transformers: 
Winding and rewinding of transformers. 20 days. 
7. Ele./ff Overhead line erection: 
Overhead line erection and different electrical connections to electrical apparatus. 20 days. 
8. Ele./g. Laying underground cables & flexible cables, 
cable jointing, vulacansing of trailing cable/ 20 days. 
9. Ele./h. Installation & maintenance of under ground 26 days. 
 
 lighting & signaling equipment. 
10. Ele./hh Repair of Electrical Apparatus: 
Repair of switchgear, Gate-end-box, Drill panel, 
simple exploder. Mining telephones, electrical 
units of Coal Cutting Machine, Coal drill, Coal 
loader, pump set, ventilating fan and winding equipment and mining machinery. 30 days. 
 
 
   SCHEDULE   = 'H- VI' 
 
TRADE: HEAVY EARTH MOVING MACHINERY : 
 
 
CODE SUBJECT DAYS. 
HEMM 1 Fitting ,Drilling, Tapping and Reaming: 
Use of hand tools, Calipers, precision measuring 
instruments chipping, drilling blind holes, tapping use of cutting lubrications, stocks & dikes, Hand & 
Machine reaming, Removal & broken studs. 20 days. 
HEMM 2 Turning, Sheet Metal Work and Welding: 
Binding, rolling, soft soldering, nipples and cables, 
pipe bending simple welding of metal. 20 days. 
HEMM 3 Power unit of Tractor, cooling system Fuel system 
steering and breaking system; 
Handling a tractor equipment, engine removal, 
engine dismantling, fit valve guides, checking & 
fitting of bearings, pistons & rings, engine timing, 
cooling system overhauling the water pump, fuel system, overhaul of friction clutch gear box, gear shift mechanism, steering mechanism overhaul adjust & test breaking system. 20 days. 
HEMM 4 Tractor Hydraulics, under carriage: 
 Fault finding remove and refit wheels, tires & 
tubes Minor repair tires, tube, and track 
adjustments. 20 days. 
HEMM 5 Suspension, Electrical and Starter system:  
Remove and refit recoil spring, overhaul 
suspension system, minor repairs to starter motors, generators and regulators start and stop 
procedure, battery maintenance. 30 days. 
 
 
 
  SCHEDULE -  H - VI' 
 
 
CODE Subject Days. 
HEMM 6 Lubrication system, Tractor Implements, Trouble: 
 Shooting Lubrication system and reconditioning of oil fitters and pumps, lubrications of implements and their application adjustment and maintenance, power take off system driving & Tractor. 26 days. 
 
 HEMM 7 Earth Moving Machinery and Cooling system: 
Operation of Earth Moving machinery, fitting brake 
lining, removal and refit valve guides, valve seat 
inserts, and ball races, oxy acetylene cutting and 
Arc welding, fit, adjust and checks of Fans, Fan belts, thermostat. 20 days. 
HEMM 8 Fuel system petrol and Engine: 
Simple fuel tank repairs, overhaul of carburetors, 
mechanical /Electrical fuel pump, check and renew filters. Air cleaner maintenance, overhaul of 
Transfer pump, fuel injection equipment, calibration 
and phasing, installation of fuel lines and pump.  20 days. 
HEMM 9 Electrical and ignition systems of Diesel and petrol 
Engine : 
Running repairs, checking lighting and warning 
circuits, checking glow plugs, overhaul of super 
chargers, turbo charger, fitting ignition coil, 
distribute Maintenance Test, Clean and adjust of sparking plugs, Magneto testing and timing. 20 days. 
HEMM 
10. Transmission and Drive system: 
Fitting and Maintenance of Universal joints, power 
shift mechanism in transmission Maintenance, 
adjustment, inspection and repair of final driver. 20 days. 
  226 days. 
  
  
DIARY SHEET 
 
(To be filled in duplicate) 
 
1. Name of the Apprentice: 2. Trade: 3. Place of Posting: 4. Date of Joining:  
Date:   Jobs undertaken:                                                 Remarks of Supervisory/Training Guide: 
  1. 2. 
3. 
 Signature of the Apprentice.                                                                 Signature of Manager/                                                                                                                   Training Guid e, 
  
