 
  
MINISTRY OF LABOUR   
THE MINES RULES, 1955  
 1 SRO. 1421 dated 2nd July, 1955 – In exercise of the powers conferred by Section 58 of the Mines Act, 
1952 (35 of 1952), the Central Government hereby makes the following rules the same having been 
previously pub lished as required by sub -section (1) of Section 59 of the Act, namely:  
 
CHAPTER - I 
 
PRELIMINARY  
 
1. Short title and applications  :- (1) These rules may be called the Mines Rules, 1955.  
(2) Except as otherwise expressly provided, the rules shall apply to every mine of whatever 
description to which the Act applies.  
 
2. Definitions  _ In these rules, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context - 
a) “the Act” means the Mines Act, 1952 (35 of 1952):  
b) “court of inquiry” means a court of inquiry appo inted under section 24 of the Act;  
c)  “Form” means a form as given in the First Schedule;  
d) “Section” means a section of the Act:  
e) “Schedule” means a schedule appended to these rules;  
f)  “Manager” includes Mine Superintendent who is appointed by the owner or agent of a mine under 
section 17 of the Act and as such, responsible for the control, management, supervision and direction of 
a mine;  
g) “Certifying surgeon” means a qualified medical practitioner ppointed to be a certifying surgeon under 
section II;  
 2[ *  *  *  *  * ] 
1. Published in the Gazette of India, 1955, Part II, Section 3, Page 1172  
2. Omitted by GSR 1886 dated 25.12.1965  
  
1[(h)]“Calendar year” means a year from the first day of January to the thirty -first day of December;  2[(i)] “Officer in -charge Canteen” me ans the person (other than the manager) whom the owner or agent may 
appoint for securing compliance with the provisions in respect of canteens.  
3[(j)] “Ordinary employed” with reference to any mine or part thereof, means the average number of 
persons emplo yed per day in the mine or part of mine during the preceding 4[calendar year] (obtained 
by dividing the number of man days  worked by the number of working days excluding rest days and 
other non -working days)  5[(k)]  
CHAPTER - II 6
[COMMITTEE]  
 6[3. Term of  office  - The term of office of the members referred to in clause (c), (d) and (e) of sub section 
(1) of section 12 of the Act, shall be three years from the date on which their appointment is notified in the 
official Gazette:  
 
 Provided that a member shal l notwithstanding the expiry of a period of three years, continue to 
hold office until the appointment of his successor is notified in the Official Gazette;  
 
 Provided further that a member appointed to fill a casual vacancy shall hold office for the 
rema ining period of the term of office of the member in whose place he is appointed and shall continue to 
hold office on the expiry of the term of office until the appointment of his successor is notified in the 
Official Gazette.”]  
 
  
 7[4. Secretary of the Commi ttee - An Inspector of Mines nominated in this behalf by the Chief Inspector 
shall act as the Secretary to the Committee.]  7[5. Remuneration  - Members of the Committee shall receive such honorarium as the Central Government 
may fix.]  
1. Relettered, ibid  
2. Inser ted by GSR 316 dated 26.4.1986  
3. Renumbered by GSR 316 dated 26.4.1986  
4. Substituted by GSR 1786 dated 30.9.1970  
5. Omitted, ibid. 6. Substituted by GSR 316 dated 26.4.1986  
7.     substituted by GSR 316, dated 26.4.1986.   
1[6. *  *  *  *  *] 
 
7. Resignation .- (1) A member other than the Chairman may resign the office by writing under his hand 
addressed to the Chairman   .  
 
(2) The Chairman    may resign his office by writing under his hand addressed to the Central Government.  
 
(3) The resignation referred to in sub. rule (1) or sub -rule (2) above shall take effect from the date of its 
acceptance 2[or on the expiry of thirty days from the date of receipt of such resignation whichever is 
earlier] by the Chairman    of the Central Government as the case may be.  
 
8. Absence fr om India  - (1) Before a member leaves India (a) he shall intimate to the Chairman    the date 
of his departure from and the date of his expected return to India; and  
     
(b) if he intends to be absent from India for a period longer than six months, he shall t ender his 
registration.  
 
(2) If any member leaves India without taking the action required by sub -rule (1) he shall be deemed to 
have resigned with effect from the date of his departure from India.  
 
9. Notification of Vacancies  - (1) The Chairman shall inform the Central Government as soon as a vacancy 
occurs in the membership of the 4[Committee] by the resignation or death of a member.  
 
(2) In case such a vacancy occurs by the death of the Chairman, information shall be furnished to the 
Central Government by the C hief Inspector or the Inspector 3[appointed] to the Committee by the 
Government, as the case may be.  
 
1. Omitted, ibid  
2. Inserted by SRO 2062 dated 14.6.1957  
3. Substituted by GSR 1886, dated 25.12.1965  
4. Substituted by GSR 316 dated 26.4.1986  
 
 
10. Disposal of busi ness  - (1) All questions which the 1[Committee] is  required to consider shall be 
considered either at its meetings or by circulation of papers as the Chairman    may direct:  
 
 Provided that papers need not be circulated to any member who is absent from In dia at the time.  
 
(2) When a question is referred by circulation of papers, any member may request that the question be 
considered at a meeting of the 1[Committee] and thereupon  the Chairman    may direct that it be so 
considered:  
 
Provided that if three or m ore members make such a request, the Chairman    shall direct that it be so 
considered.  
 
 
  
11. Time and place of meetings  -  The 1[Committee] shall meet at such places and time as may be 
appointed by the Chairman   .  
 
12. Notice of meetings  - (1) The Secreta ry to the 1[Committee] shall give at least fourteen days’ notice to 
every member of the 1[Committee] present in India of the time and place fixed for each meeting and shall 
send to every such member agenda of business to be disposed off at that meeting, no t less than seven days 
before the meeting :  
 
Provided that when an emergent meeting is called, at least two days’ clear notice shall be given.  
 2[1A * * * * * *] 
 3[(2) Notices referred to in sub -rule(1) shall be delivered at or posted to, the usual place of residence of the 
member.”]  
 4[(3)] No business which is not on the agenda shall be considered at a meeting without the permission of the 
Chairman.  
 
1. Substituted by GSR 316 dated 26.4.1986  
2. Omitted by GSR 316 dated 26.4.1986  
3. Inserted, Ibid  
4. Renumbered, ibid  
13. Presiding at meeting -  The Chairman shall preside at every meeting of the (meeting at which he is 
present. If the Chairman is absent from any meeting, the members present shall elect one of them to preside 
over the meeting and the member so elected sh all at that meeting exercise all the powers of the Chairman .    
 
14. Quorum  – No business shall be transacted at a meeting of the 1[Committee] unless at least four 
members including are present;  
 
Provided that at any meeting in which less than 1[four mem bers including the Chairman] are present, the 
Chairman may adjourn the meeting to a date not less than fourteen days later and inform the members 
present and notify other members that he proposes to dispose off the business at the adjourned meeting 
irrespe ctive of the quorum, and it shall thereupon be lawful to dispose off the business at such adjourned 
meeting irrespective of the number of  members  attending.  
 
15. Decision by majority – (1) Every question referred to the 1[Committee]   by circulation of  p apers shall, 
unless the Chairman , in pursuance of sub -rule(2) of rule 10 reserves it for consideration at a meeting, be 
decided in accordance with the opinions of the majority sending their opinions within the time allowed .  
(2)All questions referred to a  meeting of the 1[Committee]  shall be decided by a majority of votes of the 
members present and voting on that question.  
(3)  In the case of an equal division of votes or opinions, the Chairman shall exercise an additional vote or 
opinion.  
(4) Any member disagreei ng with a decision of the 1[Committee]  may enter a note of dissent which shall 
form part of the record of the proceedings.  
 
16.  Minutes of the meetings - (1) The Secretary of the 1[Committee]    shall circulate the proceedings of 
each meeting to all members of the Committee present in India, and thereafter record the proceedings 
in a minute book which shall be kept for permanent record.  
1. Substituted by GSR 316, dated 26.4.1986  
 
(2) The record of proceedings of each meeting shall be signed by the       
      Chair man.  
 
17.  Allowances to non -official members - Travelling and daily allowance to non -official members of the 1[Committee]   shall be regulated in accordance with the orders regarding allowances to non -  official 
members of 1[Committee]    Commissions and Boards  of Enquiry issued by the Central Government 
from time to time.  
 
  
 
18. Correspondence and accounts - The Secretary of the 1[Committee]   shall conduct all correspondence 
of the Committee and keep its account.  
 
 
19. Appearance at hearings – Any appearance required to be made by a party before the 1[Committee]   , 
except for purposes of being examined as a witness ,may be made either in person or by his agent duly 
authorised in writing, or by a legal practitioner on his behalf.  
 
20. Proceedings to be in camera - Unless the Ch airman otherwise directs, the proceedings of the 1[Committee]    shall be conducted in camera and shall be regarded  as confidential in nature.  
 
 
CHAPTER – III 
 
COURT OF INQUIRY  
 
21. Court of inquiry to be public  - The person appointed to hold inquiry under  section 24 of the Act shall 
hold the inquiry in public in such manner and under such conditions as the Court thinks most effectual for 
ascertaining the causes and circumstances of the accident or other occurrences and for enabling the Court to 
make the re port.  
 
 
1. Substituted by GSR 316 dated 26.4.1986  
 
 
22. Recovery of expenses  – 1[(1) If a court of inquiry finds, that the accident was due to any carelessness 
or negligence on the part of the management, the court may direct the recovery of the expenses of s uch 
court ,including any expenses incurred with the previous sanction of the court and any other expenses 
connected with the enquiry which the court may direct as recoverable from the owner of the mine 
concerned, in such manner and within such time as the court may specify.]  
 
 2[(2) The amount directed to be recovered under sub rule(1) may, on application by the Chief Inspector 
or an Inspector to the concerned authority, be recovered from the owner in the same manner as an arrears of 
land revenue.]  
 
 
CHAPTE R - IV 
 
CERTIFYING SURGEONS  
 
23.  Powers of Certifying Surgeon - A certifying Surgeon may within the local limits of his jurisdiction 
or in respect of mines or class or description of mines assigned to him make such inspection, 
examination or inquiry as he thi nks fit for the purpose of the Act ,and it shall be the duty of owner, 
agent or manager of the mine concerned to afford the Certifying Surgeon all reasonable facilities for 
carrying out such inspections, examination or inquiry as the case may be.  
 
24. Duties o f Certifying Surgeon  – 2[(1) On receipt of a reference under sub section (1) of section 43 of 
the Act, the certifying surgeon shall, after giving prior notice regarding date, time and place for medical 
examination and upon examining the person sent for suc h examination, prepare the age and fitness 
certificate and deliver the same to the manager of the mine concerned after retaining a copy thereof.]  
1. Substituted by GSR 1886 dated 26.12.1965  
2. Substituted by GSR 316 dated 26.4.1986  
 
 
 
  
(2)The Certifying Surgeon sh all, upon a request being made to him by the Chief Inspector of 
Inspector, carry out such examination and furnish him with such report as he may indicate in 
respect of any mine or class or description of mines in which operations involve any risk of injury  
to the health of any person or class of persons employed therein.  
 
1  [Rules 25 ,26,27 Omitted ]  
 
28. Fresh examination  - (1) If any person sent up for medical examination in pursuance 2[*     *    *]  of 
section 43 2[*     *    *] is not certified to be fit by the Certifying Surgeon, he shall not without the 
permission in writing of an Inspector, be sent for another medical examination unless a period of six 
months has elapsed from the time when he was last sent up for medical examination.  
 
(2) Any certificat e obtained in contravention of sub -rule (1) shall be void.  
 
 1   [Rule 29 – omitted]  
 
 3[CHAPTER - IV-A 
 
MEDICAL EXAMINATION OF PERSONS EMPLOYED OR TO BE EMPLOYED IN MINES  
 
29A Applicability of this Chapter  - Nothing in this Chapter shall apply to persons  who are employed 
purely on temporary or causal basis for a continuous period not exceeding six months.  
 
29B. Initial and periodical medical examinations  - After such date or dates as the Central Government 
may by notification in the Official Gazette appoi nt in this behalf, the owner, agent or manager of every 
mine shall make arrangements - 
 
1. Omitted by GSR 316 dated 26.4.1986  
2. Omitted by GSR 1886 dated 26.12.1965  
3. Inserted by GSR 557(E) dated 16.11.1978  
 
 
(a)(i) for the initial medical examination of every per son employed in the mine, within a period of five 
years of the date so notified and the said examination shall be so arranged  over a period of five years that 
one fifth of the persons employed at the mine undergo the examination every year;  
 
 Provided tha t in the case of a mine where a system of carrying out of such medical examination 
(of a comparable standard as determined by the Chief Inspector) is already in existence before the date 
aforesaid, a person who has undergone a medical examination under suc h a system on a date not earlier 
than five years before the date aforesaid, shall be deemed to have undergone an initial  medical examination 
under this sub clause and the last date of his medical examination under the said system shall be taken to be 
the date of his initial medical examination under these rules;  
 
(ii) for the initial medical examination of every person seeking employment in a mine, unless such 
person has already undergone within the preceding five years, a medical examination under 
these r ules while in employment at another mine; and  
 
(b) for the periodical medical examination thereafter of every person employed in the mine at intervals of 
not more than five years . 
 1[Provided that for the persons who are engaged in the process of mining o r milling of asbestos ,periodic 
medical examination shall be done at least once in every twelve months and every such examination shall 
 
  
include all the tests in Form “P” of the First Schedule except the X - Ray examination, which shall be 
carried out once i n every three years.   
 
Provided further that the periodic medical examination or the X Ray examination or both , shall be 
conducted at more frequent intervals if the examining authority deems it necessary to confirm a suspected 
case of a dust related  dis ease.]  
 
 
1. Inserted by GSR 707(E) dated 21.7.1989  
 
 
29C. Examining authorities  - The medical examination aforesaid shall be carried out by a Medical Officer 
appointed for the mine or a Medical Officer in the employment  of the owner of the mine, if any, o r by any 
medical officer employed in the Coal Mines Welfare Fund Organisation or any  other mines Welfare 
organisation, failing which by any State or Central Government medical officer not below the rank of an 
Assistant Civil Surgeon.  
 
29D. Notice of medic al examination  - (1) In respect of every medical examination under rule 29B, the 
manager of the mine concerned shall give at least twenty days’ prior notice in writing to the person to be 
examined, in Form M, provided  that in case of the initial medical e xamination of a person seeking 
employment at a mine, the period of notice may be shorter.  
 
(2) A copy of every such notice issued shall be sent by the manager to the examining authority 
and in the case of periodical medical examination of a person, the co pies of the previous medical 
certificate issued in Form O, pertaining to the persons concerned shall also be sent to the 
examining authority by the manager.  
 
(3) A person, who for any reasonable cause, fails to submit himself for a medical examination or 
in accordance with the notice issued to him under sub -rule(i), shall be given a second notice of a 
minimum period of ten days in Form N, by the manager and a copy of every such notice shall be 
sent by the manager to the examining authority.  
 
(4) The examin ing authority shall inform the manager whether the person concerned has 
submitted himself for medical examination or not.  
 
29E. Failure to undergo medical examination - A person who without reasonable cause, fails to submit 
himself for medical examination in accordance with a notice issued to him under sub -rule(3) of rule 29D, 
shall be liable to be discharged from service;  
 
 Provided that a person who tenders himself so liable to be discharged for failure to submit himself 
for medical examination shall be r equired to show cause why he could not comply with the notice within 
the time specified therein. If his explanation is found satisfactory by the management; he shall be given 
another chance to appear for medical examination.In case his explanation is not f ound satisfactory by the 
management, his service shall be terminated by the management :  
 
 Provided further that in case of any dispute, the same shall be referred  to the Chief Inspector for 
his decision within 60 days of the order communicated by the own er, agent or manager of the mine to the 
said person.  
 
29 E . Failure to undergo medical examination  .- A person who without reasonable cause ,fails to submit 
himself for medical examination in accordance with a notice issued to him under sub -rule (3) of ru le 29D, 
shall be liable to be discharged from service;  
Provided that a person who renders himself so liable to be discharged for failure to submit himself for 
medical examination shall be required to show cause why he could not comply with the notice withi n the 
time specified therein. If his explanation is found satisfactory by the management ;he shall be given another 
 
  
chance to appear for medical examination . In case his explanation is not found satisfactory by the 
management, his service shall be termina ted by the management;  
Provided further that in case of any dispute, the same shall be referred to the Chief Inspector  for his 
decision within 60 days of the order communicated by the owner ,agent or manager of the mine to the said 
person.  
   
29F. Standa rd and report of medical examination  -(1) The examining authority holding initial medical 
examination under sub clause(i) of clause (a), or periodical medical examination under clause (b) of rule 
29B shall examine a person according to the standard laid do wn in Form P and the initial medical 
examination under sub clause (ii) of clause (a) of rule 29B of all persons seeking employment in a mine 
shall be according to the standard laid down in Form P -I. 
 (2) As soon as may be, after examination, a copy of the medical certificate in Form O, shall be 
issued by the examining authority to the person concerned by Registered post or delivered under 
receipt and another copy sent to the manager of the mine concerned by Registered post or 
delivered under receipt.  
(3) Th e examining authority shall retain the third copy of the medical certificate.  
(4) In the case of periodical medical examination of person, the examining authority shall also 
send the copy of previous medical certificates of the person concerned received in  pursuance of 
sub-rule(1) of rule 29D, to the manager of the mine concerned.  
 
29G Retention and transfer of medical certificates – (1) All medical certificates 1[including all medical 
examination records with medical history and job details to depict the o ccupational dust exposure profile] 
of persons employed or to be employed in a mine shall be retained in the possession of the manager of the 
mine so long as the person is employed in the mine and for a period  of 2[ten] years thereafter:  
  
Provided that th e manager of a mine where such person is or was employed shall, if so requested by the 
manager of any other mine where the person is to be employed, send to him all medical certificates with 
respect to such person.  
 
(2) If the examining authority who condu cts medical examination of persons employed or to be 
employed in any mine is relieved of his duties regarding medical examination, the medical 
practitioner shall transfer all records of medical examination in his possession to the manager of 
the  mine conc erned.  
 
29H.  Identity of candidates  - (1) Every  candidate for medical examination under clause (a) of rule 
29B shall, at the time of examination, hand over three unmounted  photographs (passport size) of himself to 
the examining authority. The examining a uthority, after satisfying itself that each photograph is a likeness 
of the candidate, shall endorse each of them with the name and father’s name or husband’s name of the 
candidate.  
 
(2) The examining authority, shall also record the left hand thumb impres sion or the signature of 
every candidate appearing before it for medical examination on the copies of the medical 
certificate in Form O.  
 
1. Inserted by GSR 707(E) dated 21.7.89  
2. Inserted by ibid  
 
 
29 I. Medical Examination of women - No women shall, without h er consent, be medically examined by a 
male medical practitioner except in the presence of another women.  
 
29J. Appeal for re -examination - (1) Where as a result of an initial medical examination under clause (a), 
or of periodical medical examination  unde r clause (b) of rule 29B, a person has been declared unfit for 
employment  in mines or in  particular category of mines or in any specified operations in mine , he may, 
within thirty days of the receipt by him of a copy of the Certificate referred to in su b-rule(2) of rule 29F, 
 
  
file an appeal with the manager of the mine against the declaration aforesaid, and request for a medical re -
examination by an Appellate Medical Board constituted under rule 29K.  
 
(2)(a)  The manager shall arrange to have the appellant  medically re -examined by the Appellate Medical 
Board within thirty days of the receipt of the Appeal, and shall give to the Appellant fifteen days’ prior 
notice of the medical re -examination by the Appellate Medical Board in Form Q.  
 
(b) A person, who for any  reasonable cause, fails to submit himself for a medical re -examination in 
accordance with the notice given to him under clause (a), shall be given another notice in Form R in 
similar manner.  
 
(c) A person who has, without reasonable cause, fails to submit him self for a medical re -examination in 
accordance with a notice given to him under clause (b) shall cease to be in employment at the mine or in 
a particular category of mines or in any specified operations in mine, as the case may be, after the 
expiry of thi rty days from the last date notified for his medical re -examination.  
 
(3) In respect of every medical re -examination by the Appellate Medical Board, the appellant shall pay 
such fees and the medical examination shall be conducted in such manner as may be deter mined by the 
Appellate Medical Board. In case the Appellate Medical Board finds him fit for employment in mines, 
the fees shall be reimbursed in full to the appellant by the owner of the mine where he is employed.  
 
29K.  Constitution of Appellate Medical Bo ard - For the purpose of medical re -examination on 
appeal, the Appellate Medical Board shall consist of the following officers, namely :  
 
(a) One duly qualified Medical Officer in the employment of the Directorate General of Mines Safety who 
shall also act as the Convenor of the Board.  
(b) One Medical Officer duly qualified in allopathic system of medicine to be nominated by the Chief 
Inspector in consultant with the Welfare Organisation set up by the Central Government for the persons 
employed in the mine.  
(c) One Med ical Officer duly qualified in allopathic system of medicine employed in the State or Central 
Government or a Government undertaking and not below the rank of Assistant Civil Surgeon.  
 
 Provided that if a Medical Officer under clause (b) or clause (c) is n ot available, the Appellate 
Medical Board shall be constituted with two persons only.  
 
29L.  Standard and report of medical re -examination by the Appellate Medical Board - The 
Appellate Medical Board shall medically examine the appellant in accordance with the standard laid down 
in Form P for initial medical examination of workers already in employment as well as periodical medical 
examination and in accordance with the standard laid down Form P -I for initial medical examination of the 
persons to employed an d shall issue to the manager of the mine concerned and to the appellant a medical 
certificate in Form S.  
 
29M. Unfit persons not to be employed -  (1) Where,  as a result of an initial medical examination made 
under clause (a), or of a periodical medical e xamination under clause (b) of rule 29B a person has been 
declared unfit for employment in mines or in a particular category of mines or in any specified operations 
in mine, he shall not be employed or continue to employed in mine or in the category of min es or on the 
operations specified, after the expiry of thirty days from the date of his medical examination unless he has 
filed an appeal under sub rule (1) of rule 29J against the declaration.  
 
(2) Where the person concerned has filed an appeal under sub -rule (1) of rule 29J, but has been 
declared by the Appellate  Medical Board, after a medical re -examination, to be unfit for 
employment in mines or in a particular category of mines or on any specified operations in mines, 
he shall not be employed or conti nue to be employed in mine or in the category of mines or on 
the operations specified, after the expiry of thirty days from the date of his medical re -examination 
by the Appellate Medical Board:  
 
  
 
 Provided that, if the Medical Officer carrying out the init ial medical examination under 
clause (a), or the periodical examination under clause (b) of rule 29B, or the Appellate Medical 
Board carrying out the medical re -examination of persons already in employment is of the opinion 
that the disability of the perso n examined is of such a nature and degree that it will not seriously 
affect or interfere with the normal discharge of his duties, it may recommend his continuation in 
employment in the mine for a period not exceeding six months during which such person may  get 
his disability cured or controlled and submit himself for another medical examination and be 
declared fit.  
 
29N.  Compensation for industrial disease - if as a result of any medical examination under these rules 
or under the regulations, a person is fo und to have contacted any disease specified in Part C of Schedule III 
to the Workmen’s  compensation Act. 1923, the provision of section 3 of that Act shall become applicable 
in respect of that person.  
 
29O.  Cost of medical examination - Subject to the pro visions of sub -rule(3) of rule 29J full cost of 
every medical examination under these rules, shall be borne by the owner of the mine concerned.  
 
29P.  Annual returns  - (1) On or before the 20th day of February every year, the manager of every mine 
shall su bmit to the Chief Inspector annual returns in respect of the preceding calendar year in Form T.  
 
(2) If a mine is abandoned or working thereof is discontinued over a period exceeding sixty days or if a 
change occurs in the ownership of a mine, the returns requ ired under sub rule (1) shall be submitted 
within thirty days of abandonment or change of ownership or within  ninety days of discontinuance, as 
the case may be.  
 1[CHAPTER IV B  
 
WORKMEN’S INSPECTOR AND SAFETY COMMITTEE  
 
 
29Q Workmen’s Inspector - (1) (a) For every mine wherein 500 or more persons are ordinarily employed, 
the owner, agent or manager shall designate three suitably qualified employees of the mine in consultation 
with the registered trade union in the mine and where there are more than one reg istered trade unions, the 
union recognised as per procedure in practice or the most representative union as per the membership 
records available at that point of time ,and if there are no registered trade unions, in consultation with the 
elected representa tive of the workmen, as technical experts, to carry out inspection of the mine on behalf of 
the workers employed therein, one each for mining operations, electrical installations and mechanical 
installations. When the number of persons employed in a mine e xceeds 1500, the Workmen’s Inspector 
shall be assisted by one additional Workmen’s Inspector in mining discipline for every additional 1000 
persons or part thereof.  
 
(b) In every mine, the owner, agent or manager shall constitute in the manner laid down in cl ause (a), a 
panel of Workmen’s Inspector who may serve as substitute during absence of regular Workmen’s 
Inspector.  
(c) In the panel there shall be at least one Workmen’s Inspector each for mining, electrical and mechanical 
installations and operations.  
 
(2) No pe rson shall act as a Workmen’s Inspector of a mine unless – 
 
1. Inserted by GSR 316 dated 26.4.1986  
 
(a) he possesses an Overman’s or Foreman’s Certificate granted under the Act :  
 
Provided that - 
 
  
(i) in relation to electrical machinery installed in mines, a perso n holding a valid Electrical Supervisor’s 
Certificate of  Competency covering mining installations, issued under sub -rule(1) of rule 45 read with 
clause (ii) of sub -rule (1) of rule 131 of the Indian  Electricity  Rules, 1956 framed under the Indian 
Electr icity Act ,1910 shall be so designated; and  
(ii) In relation to other machinery and mechanical appliances installed in mines a person appointed to 
secure the installation, running and maintenance in safe working order of machinery in the mine, being 
not less in  status than that of an Overman, Mine Foreman or Electrical Supervisor shall be so 
designated.  
 
(b) he has at least five years of experience in mines including at least two years in workings of the mines 
for which he is nominated,and  
(c) he has undergone an orient ation training course for Workmen’s Inspector consisting of not less than 
thirty lectures and demonstrations, of not less than two hours’ duration each, in accordance with the 
syllabus specified by and at a centre approved by the Chief Inspector by a gener al or special order.  
(3) The Workmen’s Inspector shall perform the duties mentioned in clause (a) of sub rule (1) of rule 29R 
for two days in every week; on remaining days of the week, he shall perform his normal duties unless 
called upon to perform the duties   mentioned in clauses(b) and (c) of sub -rule(1) of rule 29R.  
(4) (a) The owner, agent or manager shall afford the Workmen’s Inspector all reasonable facilities for 
making any entry, inspection, measurement, examination or inquiry in connection with his duties . 
 
(b) An official of the mine shall accompany the Workmen’s Inspector during his inspection.  
(c) The Workmen’s Inspector may carry out his inspection at any time.  
 
(5) When there occurs an accident or dangerous occurrence in or about a mine , the owner, agent or 
mana ger shall forthwith inform the concerned Workmen’s Inspector about the accident or the 
occurrence.  
 
(6) The Workmen’s Inspector shall not exercise his powers to impede or obstruct the working of the mine.  
 
(7) A Workmen’s Inspector nominated under sub -rule(1) shal l, unless he resigns from his office, hold 
office for a period of three years from the date of his nomination and shall be eligible for one re -
nomination.  
 
(8) No owner, agent or manager shall take any action against a Workmen’s Inspector for any of his action s 
in the discharge of his duties and functions laid down in these rules.  
 
29R.  Duties of Workmen’s Inspector  - (1) The duties of the Workmen’s Inspector shall be - 
 
(a) to inspect all shafts, inclines, roads, workplaces and the equipment thereat including the equipment for 
conveyance and transport of workers;  
 
(b) in case of any urgent and immediate danger that comes to his notice ;  
 
i)  to inform the manager and the Inspector about the same; and  
 
ii)  to suggest remedial measures necessary to avoid the danger ; and  
 
(c) to accompany the Inspector in the course of complete inspection of the mine and also during such 
other inspections as may be considered necessary by the Inspector.  
 
(2) The Workmen’s Inspector shall record a full report of the matters ascertained as a result of  his 
inspection in an interleaved paged and bound register kept for the purpose in the mine in Form U. The 
 
  
Workmen’s Inspector making the entry in the register aforesaid shall duly sign such entries with date 
and take a copy of the entries for his record.  
 
29S.  Action on the report of Workmen’s Inspector  -   
 
(1) The owner, agent or manager of the mine shall enter in the register mentioned in sub -rule (2) of rule 
29R, within a period of 15 days from the date of entry in the register, remarks thereon showing the  
remedial measures taken and the date on which such action was taken.  
 
(2) In case of any difference of opinion between the Workmen’s Inspector and the owner, agent or 
manager, a copy of the report with remarks thereon regarding such difference of opinion shal l be sent by 
the owner, agent or manager to the Chief Inspector or an Inspector for decision.  
 
29T Safety Committee - For every mine wherein more than 100 persons are ordinarily employed, the 
owner, agent or manager shall constitute  a Safety Committee for  promoting Safety in the mine;  
 
 Provided that the Chief Inspector or an Inspector may by a general or special order in writing 
require the owner, agent or manager of any group of specified mines or of all mines in a specified area to 
constitute a group Sa fety Committee in such manner and subject to such conditions as he may specify in the 
order.  
 
29U Composition of Safety Committee _  The Safety Committee shall consist of : - 
 
(a) the manager  who shall be the Chairman    ;  
(b) five officials or competent persons of  the mine nominated by the Chairman   ;  
(c) five workmen nominated by the workmen of the mine in accordance with the procedure prescribed in 
clause (a) of sub -rule(1) of rule 29Q for nomination of Workmen’s Inspector;  
(d) Workmen’s Inspector where so designated; a nd 
(e) the Safety Officer, or where there is no Safety Officer, the senior most mine official next to the 
manager, who shall act as Secretary to the Committee;  
 
Provided that any other official, competent person or work person may be co -opted by the Chairman   as a 
member of the Committee on any day or days of the meeting, if considered necessary.  
 
29V. Functions of Safety Committee  - The functions of the Committee shall be - 
 
(1) to discuss remedial measures against the unsafe conditions and practices in the mine a s pointed out in 
the reports of Workmen’s Inspector or otherwise brought to the notice of the Committee and make 
appropriate recommendations;  
(2) to consider, before commencement of operations in any new district of mine or commissioning of new 
electrical or m echanical installation or introduction of new mining technique, the proposed Safety and 
health measures including related codes of practice and to make appropriate recommendations;  
(3) to discuss the report of inquiry into accident and make appropriate recomme ndations;  
(4) to formulate and implement appropriate Safety campaign based on analysis of accidents;  
(5) to meet at least once in 30 days to consider the matter placed before it and any other matter that may be 
raised by the members and make such recommendations a s it may deem fit; and  
(6) to serve as a forum for communication on Safety and occupational health matters.  
 
29W Implementation of recommendations of the Safety Committee  - The owner, agent or manager 
shall, within a period of 15 days from the date of receipt of the recommendations of the Safety Committee, 
shall indicate to the Secretary to the Safety Committee, the action taken to implement the 
recommendations.]  
 
 
 
  
  
CHAPTER -V 
 
HEALTH AND SANITATION PROVISIONS  
 
30. Quantity of drinking water  - (1) The quantity  of drinking water to be provided in a mine or any part 
thereof shall be on a scale of at least two litres for every person employed at any one time and such 
drinking water shall be readily available at conveniently accessible points during the whole of th e working 
shift.  
 
(2) Where 100 persons or more are employed, either above ground or in opencast workings, at any one 
time, an Inspector may by order in writing require the drinking water to be effectively cooled by 
mechanical or other means available.  
(3) No char ge shall be made for the drinking water so supplied.  
 
31. Storage of drinking water  – 1[(1) If drinking water is not provided from taps connected with constant 
water - supply  system, it shall be kept cool in suitable vessels sheltered from whether and such ves sels 
shall be emptied, cleaned and refilled very day. Steps shall be taken to preserve the water, the storage 
vessels and the vessels used for drinking water in a clean and hygienic condition.]  
 
(2) If the source of drinking water is not from a public water su pply system, an Inspector may by order in 
writing require the owner, agent or manager of the mine to submit with the least possible delay a 
certificate from a competent health authority or analyst as to the fitness of the water for human 
consumption.  
 
32. Deci sion of Chief Inspector final  - If any question arises as to whether water supply arrangements are 
satisfactory and in accordance with the requirements of section 19 and rules 30 and 31, the decision of 
the Chief Inspector shall be final.  
 
1. Substituted b y GSR 1786 dated 30.9.1970  
 
 
33. Surface latrines and urinals . - (1) On the surface at every mine, adequate latrine and urinal 
accommodation shall be provided at conveniently accessible places separately for the use of males and 
females employed in the min e. 
 
(2) The scale of latrine accommodation shall be at least one seat for every 50 males and at least one seat 
for every 50 females employed at one time;  
 
 Provided that where sanitary latrines are maintained in bathing places, the number of latrines to be 
provided under this rule may include such sanitary latrines.  
Note  – In calculating latrine accommodation, any fraction less than 50 shall be reckoned as 50.  
 
34. Standards of constructions  .- Every latrine on the surface provided for the use of persons emplo yed in 
a mine shall conform to the following standards of construction :  
 
a) It shall be on a site approved of in writing by an Inspector ,  
b) It shall be built of brick or other suitable building material ,  
c)  It shall be adequately drained and properly ventilated  and afforded effective protection from the 
weather,  
d) It shall be of a type approved of in writing by a Inspector ,  
e) the floor and any interior surface of walls up to a height of 1[1.25 metres] shall be cement punned or 
otherwise so finished as to provide a smooth impervious surface ,  
 
  
f)  It shall be partitioned off so as to secure privacy and shall have a proper door and fastenings, and where 
a latrine intended for the use of one sex adjoins a latrine intended for the use of other sex, the 
approaches shall be se parate,  
g) where a latrine is of the service type, the service chamber shall be provided with an efficient trap door 
and the receptacle for night -soil shall be of galvanised iron ,  
 
1. Substituted by GSR 31 dated 29.12.1960  
 
 
h) the interior walls, ceilings and par titions shall be white -washed once at least in very four months, and 
the dare of such white -washing shall be recorded in a book kept at the mine for the purpose;  
 
 Provided that this requirement regarding white -washing shall not apply to those parts of wal ls, 
ceilings or partitions which are laid in glazed tiles or otherwise finished so as to provide a smooth polished 
and impervious surface but all these parts shall be washed with suitable detergents and disinfectants at least 
once in every seven days.  
 
35. Sign -boards to be displayed  - Where persons of both sexes are employed, there shall be displayed 
outside each latrine a signboard in the language understood by the majority of workpersons “For Males” or 
“For Females” as the case may be. Each sign board sh all also have the figure of a man or a women as the 
case may be.  
 
36. Provision of water for washing etc.  - (1)  Where a piped water supply is available, a sufficient number 
of water taps, conveniently accessible, shall be provided in or near such latrines . 
 
(2) If piped water supply is not available, a sufficient quantity of water shall be kept stored in suitable 
receptacles near latrines.  
 
37. Underground latrines  - If in any mine more than fifty persons are employed underground at any one 
time, latrines shal l be provided underground on a scale approved by an Inspector at convenient points near 
the working shafts and at entrances to the districts or sections of the mine. The latrines shall be of a type 
approved of in writing by an Inspector.  
 
38. Sanitation - (1) At every mine all underground working places and travelling roadways shall be kept 
clean from excreta.  
 
(2) All latrines and urinals in or about a mine shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition.  
 
(3) Receptacles for night -soil shall be cleaned and disinf ected at least once in every day.  
(4) Proper arrangements shall be made on the surface for the disposal of night -soil and urine. Such 
arrangements shall comply with the requirements of any health authority or Mines Board within whose 
jurisdiction the mine is s ituated.  
 
39. Obligation of workpersons -(1) No person shall want only misuse or damage the latrines provided 
either on the surface or underground.  
 
(2) No person shall pollute the underground working of a mine with excreta. All persons employed 
underground sha ll acquaint themselves with the sanitary arrangements provided from time to time in the 
section of the mine in which they have to work or pass.  
 
CHAPTER - VI 
FIRST -AID AND MEDICAL APPLIANCES  
 
 
  
1[40. Arrangements for training persons in first -aid etc. -(1) It shall be the duty of the owner, agent or 
manager of a mine to see that adequate and suitable arrangements are made for the training of persons in 
first-aid and the provision of such equipment as is prescribed in these rules.  
 
(2) (a) It shall be the duty of t he owner, agent or manager to see that adequate and suitable arrangements 
are made for the speedy removal from the mine to a dispensary or hospital ,of persons employed in the 
mine who while on duty suffers from serious bodily injury or illness of a seriou s nature.  
 
(b) Unless otherwise approved by an order in writing of the Chief Inspector or an Inspector and subject to 
such conditions as may be specified therein, the arrangements for the purpose of clause(a) shall be by 
means of a proper ambulance van, and in  case such ambulance van is not readily available in spite of 
proper and timely requisition, it may be by other suitable motor vehicle in which the person can be 
taken in a supine condition on a stretcher.)  
 
1. Substituted by GSR 1786 dated 30.9.1970  
 
41. Fir st-aid qualifications  - No  person other than qualified nurse, dresser, compounder -cum-dresser or 
medical practitioner shall be appointed to render first -aid ,or to be in charge of a first -aid station referred to 
in rule 44,unless he is the holder of a val id first -aid certificate of the standard of St. John’s Ambulance 
Association (India).  
 1[42. First aid personnel  - (1) The owner, agent or manager of  a mine shall see that every first -aid station 
provided under rule 44 is placed, during every working shif t ,in charge of a person holding qualifications 
specified in rule 41. The persons in charge of a first aid station in any shift should be readily available 
throughout the shift.  
(2) The name and designation of every person appointed to be in charge of a first -aid station shall be 
prominently ,displayed at every first -aid station.  
(3) An up -to-date list of persons appointed to be in charge of first -aid stations in the mine shall be kept in 
the office of the mine and also displayed prominently at the first -aid room. ] 
 
43.  2[First -aid] rooms  (1) At every mine employing more than 150 persons on any one day of the 
preceding calendar year, there shall be provided and maintained in good order a suitable first -aid room.  
 
 3[(2) The first -aid room shall be situated at a conven ient place on the surface of the mine and shall be 
used only for first -aid work.]  
 
(3) The 4[first -aid] room shall have a floor space of not less than 10 square metres and shall contain at least 
the equipment specified in the Second Schedule  
 5[(4)(a) The firs t-aid room shall be in charge of a qualified medical practitioner, where the number of 
persons ordinarily employed in a mine is more than 1000, such medical practitioner shall be a whole time 
employee at the mine.  
1. Substituted by GSR 1886 dated 26.12.1965.   
2. Substituted by GSR 239 dt. 3.2.1965  
3. Inserted, ibid.   
4. Substituted by GSR 31 dt. 29.12.1960.  
5. Substituted by GSR 1786 dt. 30.9.1970  
 
(b) The medical practitioner referred to in clause (a) shall be assisted by a nurse and a dresser or a 
compounder and a dresse r who are qualified in the Allopathic system of medicine. Whenever the Chief 
Inspector feels it necessary, he may require by an order in writing that such number of additional nurse 
or compounders or dressers shall be appointed to assist the medical practi tioner as may be specified by 
him. 
 
 
  
(c) The nurse, compounder or dresser referred to in clause (b) shall be whole time employee of the 
mine and shall be readily available at the first -aid room throughout the period when persons work at the 
mine :  
 
 Provide d that wherein conformity with any other law inforce, or otherwise an adequately equipped 
hospital or dispensary belonging to the owner of the mine or to any Mines Welfare Organisation is provided 
and maintained at or in the immediate vicinity of the mine,  the Chief Inspector or an Inspector authorised 
by him in this behalf may grant exemption from the provision of this sub -rule subject to such conditions as 
he may specify in writing.  
 
(5) Every person who suffers an injury during the course of work shall repor t for examination or treatment 
at the first aid room, hospital or dispensary, as the case may be, before leaving the mine, irrespective of 
first-aid having been rendered at or near the place of work.  
 1[44. First aid stations .-(1) At every mine there shall  be provided and maintained first -aid equipment as 
prescribed in the Third Schedule, at conveniently accessible stations where injured persons may receive 
first-aid treatment, as follows :  
 
(a) above ground, a first - aid station – 
(i) at the top of every shaft  or incline where men or material are  normally wound or hauled;  
(ii) in every workshop;  
 
1. Substituted by GSR 1886 dated 25.12.1965  
 
(iii) at every screening plant and loading place; and  
(iv) at every other place where more than 50 persons are   
     emp loyed at any one time.  
(b) In every opencast working, one first -aid station for every 50 persons or part thereof, employed at any 
one time; and  
 
(c) below ground, one first -aid station - 
 
i)  at the bottom of every shaft where men or material are normally wound, a nd at or near every 
plant;  
ii)  near the drive end of every haulage;  
iii) in or at the entrance to every district or section of the mine;  
 Provided that nothing in this sub -rule shall be construed to require the provision of a first -
aid station within 300 metres of another first -aid station.  
 
(2) It shall be the duty of the persons appointed to be in charge of a first -aid station under rule 42, to see 
that the equipment provided at the station is  kept in good order and that it is replenished whenever 
necessary.  
(3) An up -to-date list of all first -aid stations provided in the mine shall be kept in the office of the mine 
and also displayed prominently at the first -aid room.]  
 1[45. Carrying of first -aid outfit by officials ._ Not with standing anything contained in rule 42, eve ry 
Overman, foreman, sirdar, mate, shot -firer, blaster, electrician and mechanic  in a mine shall hold the first -
aid qualifications specified in rule 41 and shall carry, while on duty, a first -aid outfit consisting of one large 
sterilised dressing, one sma ll sterilised dressing and an ampoule of tincture of iodine or other suitable 
antiseptic, and such outfit shall be securely packed to protect it against dirt and water.]  
 
 
1. Substituted by GSR 1886 dated 25.12.1965  
 
 
 
  
 1[45.A  Medical attention in case of inju ry - (1)  Every person receiving an injury in the course of his 
duty shall, as soon as possible, report the same to an official. Where the person receiving an injury is not in 
a position to report the same to an official, it shall be the duty of the person  who first comes to know of it to 
report the same to an official. The official shall make such arrangements for rendering first aid to the 
injured as may be required. If in the opinion of the official the injury is of such a nature as to require 
immediate attention by the medical practitioner he shall arrange for the medical practitioner to be called.  
 
(2) If an official who is required to carry a first -aid outfit under rule 45 receives information about injury 
to a work person, he shall himself attend to the injured person.  
(3) It shall be the duty of the person in charge of the nearest first -aid station provided under rule 44 to 
render such first -aid  to the injured person as may be necessary.  
 
CHAPTER - VII 
EMPLOYMENT OF PERSONS  
 
46. Persons holding positions of sup ervision or management etc . - For the purpose of Section 37, the 
following shall be deemed to be persons holding position of supervision or management or employed in 
a confidential capacity - 2[(a) manager, undermanager, underground manager, assistant mana ger, ventilation officer and Safety 
officer;]  
(b) mining, electrical and mechanical engineer ;  2[(c) overman, foreman, sirdar and mate ;]  
(d) mechanical and electrical foreman and electrical supervisor ;  
(e) surveyor and assistant surveyor;  
(f) medical officer , chemist, assayer, metallurgist and welfare or personnel officer  3[ *  * * ] 4[(g)] any other person who in the opinion of the Chief Inspector holds a position of supervision or 
management.  
1. Inserted by GSR 1786 dated 30.9.1970  
2. Substituted by GSR 1886 date d 25.12.1965  
3. Omitted by GSR 312 dated 15.1.1957  
4. Relettered, ibid  
47. Weekly day of rest  – (1) For the purpose of sections 28 and 29, a day of rest for any person shall 
mean period of rest of at least 24 consecutive hours.  
 
(2) There shall be posted up in a conspi cuous place out side the office of every mine a notice showing the 
weekly day or rest. Where the weekly day of rest is not the same day for all persons employed in the mine, 
the notice shall show the day of rest allowed to each relay, or set of persons or individual.  
 
48. Notice regarding hours of work  - (1) The notices of hours of work referred to in sub -section (1) of 
section 36 shall be maintained in Form A.  
 
(2) In addition to the particulars specified in sub -section(1) and (3) of section 36, the notice sha ll also 
show the particulars of the system in which periodical changes of shifts are made for all or each set of 
persons employed in the mine.  
(3) A copy of the notice shall be affixed on the first page in the registers maintained in Forms B,C,D and 
E. 
 
49. Compen satory days of rest  – (1) The compensatory days of rest to be allowed under sub -section (1) 
of section 29 shall be so spaced that in any one week not more than two such days shall be allowed to any 
one person.  
 
 
  
(2) On or before the last day of every month, the re shall be displayed on a notice board outside the office 
of the mine a list of all persons who have not been allowed compensatory days of rest during that month, 
and the dates on which compensatory days of rest will be allowed to them in the following tw o months.  
(3) In the event of a person being discharged or dismissed, such number of compensatory days as are due 
to him shall not be reckoned as part of any period of notice to which he is entitled under any rule, award, 
agreement or contract of service, and he shall be allowed all such compensatory days of rest before the date 
of his discharge or dismissal.  
(4) There shall be maintained at every mine a register of compensatory days of rest in Form F.  
 
50. Exemption from hours and limitation of employment  - For th e purpose of section 39 of the Act, 
male adults employed in a mine on any work specified in column 1 of the Fourth Schedule shall be 
exempted from the provisions of the sections of the Act specified in column 2, subject to such conditions as 
are specified in column 3.  
 1[51. Termination of employment  - When the employment of a person in a mine is terminated, whether by 
way of dismissal, discharge or otherwise, or where such person leaves the employment, the date of such 
termination or leaving shall be enter ed against his name in the register maintained in Form B.]  
 2[52. Employment of apprentices and trainees  - No apprentice or trainee of the age of sixteen to eighteen 
years shall be employed in a mine except under immediate supervision of a competent person  and no such 
apprentice or trainee shall be employed in a mine - 
 
(a) in any work which is unduly arduous ; or  
(b) in close proximity to any machinery involving risk of injury from any moving part of the 
machines; or  
(c) at any place where the dust produced in mining operations is known to constitute a hazard to health .]  
 
CHAPTER - VIII  
 
LEAVE WITH WAGES AND OVERTIME  
 
 
53. Register of leave with wages  – 1[(1) The owner, agent or manager of every mine shall maintain in 
respect of every employee thereof a record of leav e with wages in Form G and H;  
 
1. Substituted by GSR 1886 dated 25.12.1965  
2. Substituted by GSR 316 dated 26.4.1986  
 
 Provided that if the Chief Inspector or an Inspector is of opinion that any muster roll or register 
maintained in accordance with any other rul es for the time being in force contains all the particulars 
required for the observance of the provisions contained in  Chapter VII of the Act, he may, by order in 
writing, permit the maintenance of such muster roll or register in place of the registers in  forms G and H ;  
 
 Provided further that in the case of a mine exempted under section 56, the Chief Inspector or an 
Inspector may permit the maintenance or records of leave with wages in such manner as he may approve by 
order in writing.]  
 
(2) The register men tioned in sub - rule (1) shall be preserved for a period of two years after the last entry 
in them has been made and shall not be destroyed even after the expiry of that period unless it has been 
certified by an Inspector that the leave account therein has been properly transferred to the new 
registers.  
 1[54. Information regarding leave with wages  - On or before the 20th day of February every year the 
owner, agent or manager of a mine shall exhibit on the notice board at the office of the mine information 
 
  
regarding leave with wages due to each person employed in the calculated upto the 1st January of that year 
giving the particulars specified in Form L.]  
 2[55. *   * *] 
 
56. Payment of leave wages due if a person dies - In the event of any person entitled to leave with wages, 
shall accrue to his legal heirs or nominee as the case may be.  
 2[ * * *] 
 
1. Inserted by GSR 1786 dated 30.9.1970  
2. Omitted by GSR 1886 dated 25.12.1965  
 
 
 
59. Overtime register - The register required by sub -section (4) of section 33 shall be ma intained in Form 
I. 
 
60.  Extra Wages for overtime  - (1) For the purpose of section 33, overtime shall be paid at the end of 
each wage –period.1[* * *]  
 2[(2)] In calculating overtime on any day, a fraction of an hour less than 30 minutes shall be ignored and a 
fraction of 30 minutes or more shall be counted as one hour.  3[(3)]In calculating the ordinary rate of wages or earnings in the case of a person paid by the month, the 
daily wages shall be 1/26th of his monthly rate of wages; and in the case of any o ther person it shall be the 
ordinary rate of his daily wages or earnings as the case may be.  
 
61. Cases of exemption under section 56  - (1) Where an exemption is granted under section 56, the 
manager shall display at the main entrance of the mine, a notice  giving full details of the system established 
in the mine for leave with wages and shall send a copy of it to the Inspector.  
 
(2) No alternation shall be made in the scheme approved by the Central Government at the time o granting 
exemption under section 56 w ithout its previous sanction.  
 
CHAPTER - IX 
WELFARE AMENITIES  
 4[62. Provision of shelters - At every mine where more than 50 persons are ordinarily employed, there 
shall be provided adequate and suitable shelters at or near loading wharves, opencast worki ngs, workshops 
and mine entrances where 25 or more persons are ordinarily employed for taking food and rest ;  
 
 Provided that any canteen maintained in accordance with these rules may be regarded as part of 
the requirements of this rule.]  
1. Omitted by GSR 18 86 dated 25.12.1965  
2. Renumbered, ibid  
3. Renumbered, ibid  
4. Substituted, ibid  
63. Standards of Shelters  -  Every shelter shall – 
 
(a) have a floor area of not less than 14 square metres; and  1
[(i) in the case of flat roof a height of not less than 2.5 metres to the  lowest part of the roof; and  
(ii) where the roof is a sloping one, a height of not less than 1.8 metres to the lowest part of the roof and of 
not less than 2.5 metres to the highest part of the roof;]  
 
(b) be so constructed as to afford effective protection form t he weather;  
 
  
(c) be constantly provided with adequate supply of cool and wholesome drinking water during the working 
hours of the mine ;and  
(d) be kept in a clean and tidy condition.  
 2[64. Provision of Canteens  - (1) At every mine where in more than 250 persons ar e ordinarily employed, 
if the Chief Inspector or an Inspector so requires, there shall be provided and maintained in or adjacent to 
the precincts of the mine, a canteen for the use of all persons employed ;  
 
 Provided that where the conditions at any mine so require ,the Chief Inspector or an Inspector may 
direct that other suitable arrangements approved by him for serving food, drink and other items to the 
persons employed be provided and maintained in addition to the canteen required under this sub -rule. 
 
(2) If any case, the Chief Inspector or Inspection is satisfied that no inconvenience will be caused 
to the employees concerned if a single canteen is provided to serve neighbouring mines, he may 
by an order in writing and subject to such conditions  as h e may specify therein, authorise the 
owners, agents or managers of such mines to provide jointly a single canteen.]  
 
 
1. Substituted by GSR 31 dated 29.12.1960  
2. Substituted by GSR 1786 dated 30.9.1970  
 
 
65. Standards of canteen  – 1[(1)] Every canteen shall - 
 
(a)  be constructed in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the Chief Inspector or an 
Inspector ;  
 
(b) be situated not less than 2[15 metres] from any latrine, urinal, boiler house, engine room, coal heap, ash 
heap or heap of other material and any other source of dust or smoke;  
(c) be sufficiently lighted during all hours when open for use ;  
(d) be provided with a washing place for females, suitably separated or screened to secure privacy ;  
(e) be white -washed or colour washed inside the rooms and passages at least once a year, and woodwork 
and structural iron or steel work shall be varnished or painted at least once  every three years ;  
 
 Provided that the inside walls of the kitchen shall be white washed or colour -washed once every 
four months.  
 
(f) be provide d with receptacles for garbage and have drains to carry away waste water.  
 3[(2) The canteen or any part thereof shall not be used or allowed to be used for any other purpose which 
tends to interfere with the normal or efficient functioning of the canteen. ] 
 
66. Furniture and equipment . In  every canteen there shall be provided and maintained - 
 
(a) sufficient furniture, utensils and other equipment necessary for its efficient operations ;  
(b) an adequate supply of cool and wholesome drinking water ;  
(c) suitable clean  clothes for persons cooking and serving food, drink etc.  
1. Renumbered by GSR 1786 dated 17.10.1970  
2. Substituted by GSR 31 dated 29.12.1960  
3. Inserted by GSR 1786 dated 30.9.1970  
 
 
67. Cleanliness - (1)  The canteen and its precincts  shall be kept in a sanitar y condition.  
 
 
  
(2) An adequate supply of hot water shall be provided for cleansing utensils and equipment; and all 
furniture, utensils and other equipment shall be kept clean and in a hygienic condition.  
 1[68. Maintenance of canteens and provisions of staff  (1) Every  canteen provided under these rules shall 
be run by the owner, agent  or 2[officer in -charge canteen] thereof who shall appoint supervisory and other 
staff sufficient for the proper working of the canteen.  
 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in  sub-rule (1), where the workers offer to run the canteen 
themselves and for this purpose organise a co -operative society, they shall be permitted to do so 
with financial assistance from the management.]  
 3[(3) In every such canteen, such food, drink or ot her articles shall be made available as may be 
recommended by the Canteen Managing Committee appointed under rule 69.]  
 
69. Canteen Managing Committee  - (1) The owner, agent or the officer in charge canteen shall appoint a 
Canteen Managing Committee which shall be consulted from time to time, but not less than once a month, 
as to the management and working of the canteen .  
 
(2) (a) The Committee Shall consist of an equal number of members nominated by the owner, agent ‘or 2[officer in -charge canteen] and electe d by the persons employed in the mine. The number of elected 
members shall be on a scale of one for every 1000 persons employed, provided that the number shall 
not be more than 5 or less than 2.  
(b) The term of office of the elected members shall be two years commencing from the date of the last 
election, no account being taken of a bye -election.  
1. Substituted by GSR 1886 dated 25.12.1965  
2. Substituted by GSr 316 dated 26.4.1986  
3. Inserted by GSR 1786 dated 17.10.1970  
 
(c) The owner, agent or 1[officer -in-charge canteen]  shall determine the procedure for and supervise the 
elections to the Committee.  
 
(3) The owner, agent or 1[officer -in-charge canteen] shall appoint either himself or his nominee as ex -
officio Chairman    of the Committee; and the Chairman    shall preside at every meeting of the 
Committee.  
(4) The proceedings of every meeting of the Committee shall be recorded in a minute book and shall be 
signed by the Chairman.  
 
70. Prices to be Charged  - Food ,drink and other items served in a canteen shall be sold on a non -profit 
basis and the prices charged shall be subject to the approval of the Canteen Managing Committee. A list of 
approved prices shall be conspicuously displayed in the canteen in English, Hindi and in the language of 
the district in which the mine is situat ed. 
 2[Explanation  - In calculating the cost of food, drink and other items served in a canteen, expenditure on 
the following items shall not be taken into account:  
 
(a) the cost of utensils, including cooking vessels and utensils necessary to serve food to th e 
workmen ;  
(b) the cost of furniture ;  
(c) the cost of fuel and electricity ; and  
(d) the salaries of supervisory and other staff.]  
 
71. Accounts - Proper accounts pertaining to the canteen shall be maintained.  Such accounts shall be 
audited once every twelve months by a 3[chartered accountant] or auditor, and a balance sheet shall be 
 
  
submitted to the Canteen Managing Committee not later then two months after the date of closing of the 
accounts;  
 
 
1. Substituted by GSR 316 dated 26.4.1986  
2. Inserted by GSR 1886 dated 25.12.19 65 
3. Substituted by SRO 3744 dated 16.11.1957  
 
 1[Provided that the accounts pertaining to the canteen in a mine owned and worked by 
Government having its own Accounts Department may be audited by such Department.]  
 
72. Welfare Officer  – 2[(1) For every mine  wherein 500 or more persons are 3[ordinarily employed] the 
owner, agent or manager shall appoint a suitably qualified person as Welfare Officer, and where the 
number of persons so employed in a mine exceeds 2500 ,such Welfare Officer shall be assisted by one 
suitably qualified additional Welfare Officer for every additional 2000 persons or part thereof  employed.]  
 
(2) No person shall act as a Welfare Officer of a mine unless he possesses - 
 
(a) a university degree ;  
(b) a degree or diploma in social science, 4[or soc ial work] or labour welfare recognised by the 
Government for the purpose of this rule, and preferably practical experience of handling labour 
problems in any industrial undertaking for atleast three years; and  
 
(c)  a knowledge of the language of the distr ict in which the mine is situated or the language 
understood by the majority of persons employed in the mine;  
 
 Provided that in case of a person already in service as a Welfare Officer in a mine, the above 
qualifications may, with the approval of the Chie f Inspector, be relaxed.  
 5[2A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -rule (2), the Labour Officers included in the Central Pool 
under the provisions of the Labour Officers (Central Pool) Recruitment and conditions of Service Rules, 
1951, shall be elig ible for appointment as a Welfare Officer in a mine.]  
 
1. Inserted, ibid.  
2. Substituted by GSR 607 dated 16.5.1959  
3. Substituted by GSR 1886 dated 25.12.1965  
4. Inserted, ibid.  
5. Inserted by GSR 966 dated 17.5.1968  
 
(3) Where by reason of temporary absence, illness or any  other similar cause, the Welfare Officer is unable 
to perform his duties, the owner, agent or manager shall authorise in writing person whom he considers 
competent, to act in his place ;  
 
 Provided that no such authority shall have effect for a period in excess of 30 days except with the 
previous consent of the Chief Inspector.  
 1[(4) A written notice of every appointment, authorisation, discharge, dismissal, resignation or termination 
of service of every Welfare Officer and of the date thereof shall be se nt by the owner, agent or manager to 
the Chief Inspector within seven days from the date of such appointment, authorisation. discharge, 
dismissal, resignation or termination of service.]  
 2[(5) The post  of Welfare Officer shall be advertised in a Newspape r having a wide circulation in the 
State.]  
 
73. Duties of Welfare Officer  – 3[(1)] The duties of Welfare Officer shall be - 
 
 
  
(i) to establish contacts and hold consultations with a view maintain harmonious relations between the 
management and persons employed in the mine ;  
(ii) to bring to the notice of the management the grievances of employees, individual  as well as collective, 
with a view to securing their expeditious redressal ;  
(iii) to promote relations between management and employees, which will ensure productive  efficiency as 
well as amelioration in the working conditions, and to help workers to adjust and adapt themselves to 
their working environments ;  
(iv) to assist in the formation of Work and Joint Production Committees, Co -operative Societies and Safety 
First an d Welfare Committees and to supervise their work ;  
1. Substituted by GSR 1886, dated 14.12.1965  
2. Inserted by GSR 607 dated 16.5.1959  
3. Renumbered, ibid  
(v) to help the management in regulating the grant of  leave with wages and explain to the workers the 
provisions relating to leave with wages and other leave privileges and to guide the workers in the matter 
of submission of applications for grant of leave for regulating authorised absence.   
(vi) to advise on welfare provisions such as housing facilities, food -stuffs, so cial and recreational facilities, 
sanitation, individual personnel problems and education of children;  
(vii) to supervise welfare activities, statutory or other wise including education and training of employees;  
(viii) to suggest measures which will tend to raise stan dard of living  of workers and in general promote 
their being ; and  
(ix) to perform  any other duty connected with the welfare of the persons employed in the mine.  
 1[(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -rule(1), no Welfare Officer shall deal with any  disciplinary 
case again  a person employed in a mine, or appear before a Conciliation Officer, Court or Tribunal on 
behalf of the management of a mine against a person or persons employed in the mine, except when he is 
required by the Conciliation Officer , Court or Tribunal to appear as an independent witness ;  
 
 Provided that nothing in this sub -rule shall be deemed prohibit a person employed in a mine from 
approaching the Welfare Officer in respect of a grievance arising out of any case of disciplinary a ction 
against him.  
 2[3(3)] Every Welfare Officer shall keep a record of his  day to day work and shall at the end of every year 
forward to the  Chief Inspector through the manager of the mine, concerned summary of the report of his 
work during the year.  
 
74. Conditions of service  - (1) A Welfare Officer shall be given appropriate status corresponding to the 
status of the other executive heads of the mine.  
1. Inserted by GSR 1511 dated 23.9.1966  
2. Added by GSR 607 dated 16.5.1959  
3. Renumbered by GSR 1511, dated 23 .9.1966  
1[(2)The conditions of service of Welfare Officer shall be the same as of other members of the staff of 
corresponding status in the mine ;  
 
 Provided that before the owner, agent or manager discharges of dismisses a Welfare Officer who 
has satisfac torily completed a probationary period of six months, he shall consult  the Chief Inspector or an 
Inspector authorised in this behalf by the Chief Inspector.]  
 2[(3) A Welfare Officer shall not be given less than two hundred rupees as his basic pay per men sem.]  
                                                                 
CHAPTER - X 
 3[REGISTERS, NOTICES AND RETURNS ] 
 
 
  
75. Maintenance and production of reports, Registers and other records - All reports, registers and 
other records maintained in pursuance of the regulations, rules of bye -laws, unless otherwise provided 
for, shall - 
 
(a) be kept at an office or the nearest convenient building within the precincts of the mine ;  
 
(b) be legibly entered in ink in English, Hindi or either the language understood by a major ity of 
the persons employed in the mine;  
(c) be preserved in original for a period of one calendar year after the  date of the last report or 
entry ;  
 
Provided that when the original record is lost or destroyed before the expiry of one year period , true copie s 
thereof, if available ,shall be preserved for the prescribed period;  
(d) be produced on demand before the Chief Inspector  or Inspector or any person authorised in 
that behalf of the Central Government.  
1. Substituted by GSR 607 dated 16.4.1959  
2. Inserted, ib id 
3. Substituted by GSR 1786 dated 17.10.1970  
 
 1[76.  Registers of reportable and minor accidents   - (1) The registers required by sub -section (1A) of 
section 23 of the Act  shall be maintained in Form J and a copy thereof shall be sent to the concerned 
Inspector of Mines.  
 
(2)The register, required by sub -section (3) of section 23 of the Act shall be maintained in Form 
K.] 
 
77. Register of employees  - The register required by sub -section (1) of section 48 shall be maintained in 
Form B. 2[keeping separate pa ge for each person employed in the mine.]  
 3[77-A. Identity tokens  - (1) (a) The owner, agent or manager of a mine shall issue free of cost to every 
person employed in the mine, a metal token; hereinafter referred to as token, bearing a number and other 
particulars by which such person may be identified;  
 
 Provided that if any other equally effective system of identification is in force in any 
mine and the Chief Inspector is satisfied of the same, he may exempt such mine from the operation 
of this rule sub ject to such conditions as he may deem fit to impose.  
 
(b) No person employed in a mine shall enter or be permitted to enter for work in any part of a 
mine unless he carries off his person the token issued to him.  
(c) The token shall be of such durable and strong material as cannot be easily damaged  or 
defaced.  
(d) The token shall be carried by an employee on his person during the time he is on duty.  
(e) Where a token is damaged, defaced or lost, due to reasons other than the fault or negligence of 
the employee concerned a duplicate token shall be issued forthwith to such employee free of 
charge and such duplicate token shall be stamped “DUPLICATE”.  
1. Substituted by GSR 316 dated 26.4.1986  
2. Inserted by GSR 656 dated 5.6.1980  
3. Inserted by GSR 656 dated 9.5.1980  
 
(f) Where a token i s damaged defaced or lost due to the fault or negligence of the employee 
concerned , a duplicate token stamped “DUPLICATE” shall be issued forthwith to such 
employee and such employee shall be liable to pay fifty percent of the cost of the duplicate 
token issued to him.  
 
 
  
(2) The token number and other particulars by which the employee may be identified, together 
with a passport size photograph, shall be entered in the register in Form B prescribed under 
rule 77.]  
 
78. Register of daily attendance  - (1) The regi sters required by sub -section (4) of section 48 of persons 
employed in the mine (a) belowground, (b) in open -cast workings and (c) aboveground shall be maintained 
in Forms C,D and E respectively.  
 
(2) The entries in the register maintained in Form C shall be made at the entrance or entrances to the mine, 
at the time when a person against whose name the entry is made enters or leaves the mine.  
 
(3) The entries in the registers maintained in Form D and E shall be made at suitable points on the 
premises of the mine w ith reasonable despatch, at the commencement and end of the period of work.  
 
 
79. Posting of abstracts, bye -laws and notices. – (1) The abstracts of the Act as given in the Fifth 
Schedule shall be posted up outside the office of every mine in English, Hind i and either the language of 
the district in which the mine is situated or the language understood by a majority of the persons employed 
in the mine.  
 
(2) The bye -laws shall be posted up in the manner required by sub -section (5) of section 61, in 
English, Hindi and either the language of the district in which the mine is situated or the language 
understood by a majority of the persons employed in the mine ;  
 
Provided that the Chief Inspector may require the abstracts and the bye laws to be posted up in any Indian 
language understood by a majority of the persons employed in the mine.  
 
(3) Every notice required to be posted up under these rules shall be in English, Hindi and either 
the language of the district in which the mine is situated or the language unde rstood by a majority 
of the persons employed in the mine.  
 
(4) The abstracts, bye -laws and notices required to be posted up by the Act, regulations and the 
rules shall be maintained in a clear and legible condition.  
 
CHAPTER – XI 
 
MISCELLANEOUS  
 
80. Observ ance of local time –For the purpose of section 4, the local mean time that shall ordinarily be 
observed in class or group of mines situated in any local area, specified in column 1 of the Sixth Schedule 
shall be as specified column 2 thereof.  
 
81. Intoxica ting drugs and drinks – (1)  No intoxicating drink or drug shall be carried or permitted to be 
carried below ground into the workings of a mine or part.  
 
(2) No person shall, during the course of his employment in or about a mine, possess, carry or 
consume  any intoxicating  drink or drug or remain in a state of intoxication or drunkenness.  
 
82. Occupational diseases – Fees for medical practitioner  – A medical practitioner making an 
examination in accordance with subsection (2) section 25, shall be paid as f ollows ;  
 
(a) a fee not exceeding rupees sixteen for each clinical examination.  
(b) A fee not exceeding rupees sixteen for each X -ray examination.  
 
 
  
1[82A. Disability allowance and compensation for occupational diseases .- (1) The disability allowance 
payable under first provision to sub -section(5) of section 9A of the Act shall be at the rate of fifty percent 
of the monthly wages that he was in receipt of immediately before presenting himself for the medical 
examination under sub -section (2) of section 9A of the Act . 
 
(2) If, a person decides to leave his employment in the mine, he shall be entitled to compensation as may be 
admissible under the provisions of the Workmen’s Compensation Act ,1923 (8 of 1923) as contacting of 
such disease is deemed to be an injury by a ccident under that Act. In case the disease in not covered under 
Schedule III of that Act, he shall be paid by way of disability compensation at the same rates as provided 
under that Act as if it is an injury. The lump -sum compensation payable under this r ule shall not be in 
addition to the compensation payable under that Act.  
   
Explanation – For the purpose of this rule, “wages” shall have the same meaning as defined in clause (m) 
of section (1) of section 2 of the Workmen’s Compensation Act, 1923(8 of 19 23). 
 
(3) The provisions of sub -rule (1) and (2) shall not operate to the prejudice to any right to which a person 
employed in a mine may be entitled to under any other law or under the terms of any award, agreement or 
contract of service and when such awa rd, agreement or contract of service provides for more favourable 
benefits than the disability compensation provided in sub -rule(1) and (2), such person shall be entitled to 
such benefit only.]  
 
83. Mode of payment of fees etc.  – The fees or other expenses  payable by the owner, agent or manager 
under these rules shall be paid directly into the treasury or a branch of the State Bank of India ,and the 
receipt of the treasury or bank shall be sent to the Chief Inspector along with the particulars to which the 
fees or other expenses relate.  
 
1. Inserted by GSR 316 dated 26.4.1986  
 
 
 1[83A.Appeals to the Chief Inspector  – Against an order made by the Inspector under any of these rules, 
an appeal shall lie to the Chief Inspector who may conform or modify or cancel  the order. Every such 
appeal shall be preferred within 30 days of the receipt of the order by the appellant.]  
 
CHAPTER – XII 
 
RESCISSION AND SAVINGS  
 
84. Rescission and Savings  . (1) All rules framed by Sate Governments under section 30 of Indian Mines 
Act, 1 923 those contained in Chapters II, III and VI of the Mysore Gold Mines Rules, 1953, and those 
issued vide the Government of India notification No. S.R.O 2403, dated the 12th July, 1954 are hereby 
rescinded, but all acts done, orders issued and certificate s granted or renewed under any rule so 
rescinded shall, so far as they are not inconsistent with these rules, be deemed to have been 
respectively done, issued, granted or renewed under these rules.  
 
(2)The rules contained in Chapters IV and V of the Mysore  Gold Mines Rules, 1953 shall continue 
to apply to gold mines in the State of Mysore in addition to these rules.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
1. Inserted by GSR 18 dated 24.12.1973  
 
 
 
 
  
FORM – A 
(See Rule 48(1))  
Notice of commencement and end of work  
      Name of Mine……………..  
      Name of Owner……………  
It is hereby notified that persons employed at this mine shall begin and end their period of work between 
the hours set out below.  
SN Class or kind 
of 
employment  Sex Place of work Above 
Ground/Opencast 
working/Below ground  Set or Relay 
Number 
ABC etc)  1. Set or Relay  
  A B C D Etc 
1 2 3 1[4] 2[5] 2. Shift  123 123 123 123  
     Period of work  
 
3. Begins    *     AM/ PM  
    Ends       *     AM/PM  
    
    * Interval for rest if any.  
 
4. Begins     *    AM/PM  
    Ends       *     AM/PM  
 
5. System of change of 
shifts       
     6. Date on which this n notice was first exhibited.  
 
Note: * The words and letters not required shall be scored out.  
 
Signature of Manager  
Date…………………  3[FORM – B 
(See Rules 48(3), 51, 77 and 77.A(2)]  
(1) Serial No.  
(2) Name an d surname of the employee  
(3) Father’s or Husband’s name  
(4) Age and sex.  
(5) No. and dates of the certificate, if any, held under the Mines Vocational Training Rules,1966  
      (6)(a) Designation of the employee.  
   (b) Nature of employment (whether above or below gr ound and if above ground    
          whether in opencast working or otherwise.)  
    (c) Whether employment is permanent or temporary or casual.  
(7) Home Address of the employee, giving Village, Thana, Post office and District.  
(8) Date of commencement of employme nt 
(9) Date of first appointment, with the present owner.  
(10) Date of termination or leaving of employment.  
(11) In case of an adolescent, reference to certificate of fitness granted under section 40.  
(12) Mark of identification on the body.  
(13) Name address, relationship of pe rson to be informed in case of accident/emergency.  
(14) Token number and other particulars by which the employee may be identified.  
(15) Passport size photograph of the person employed.  
(16) Signature or Thumb impression of the employee.  
(17) Remarks.  
[Signature of Manager]  
 
1. Omitted by GSR 316 dated 26.4.1986  
2. Renumbered, ibid  
3. Substituted by GSR 656 dated 5.6.1980  
 
 
  
FORM – C 
[See Rule 48(3) and 78]  
Register of persons employed below ground during the weak commencing………and ending…….19…..  
 
     Name of Mine…….Part or Section of  Mine………  
        
                     
     Name of Owner………..Hours of Shift   Begins         AM/PM  
Ends         AM/PM  
 
SN Name and 
surname 
of 
employee  Age 
& 
Sex Class or kind 
of 
employment  Relay 
or set 
No. Serial 
No. from 
Form B 
Register  Time should be rec orded against each entry  Total  
      Day Day Day Day Day Day Day No. of 
days 
worked  No. of 
hours 
worked  R 
E 
M 
A 
R 
K 
S 
 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 
      In  Out In  Out In  Out In  Out In  Out In  Out In  Out    
 
Initia l of Register Keeper  
 Weekly Abstract  Miners 
including 
loaders  1*** Others  
 Total no. of attendances     
 
 Total no. of absentees.     
 
1. Omitted by GSR 316 dated 26.4.1986  
 
  
 
FORM – D 
[See Rule 48(3) and 78]  
Register of persons employed 1[above ground] open cast working during the week commencing………and ending…….19…..  
 
     Name of Mine…….Part or Section of Mine………  
        
                     
     Name of Owner………..Hours of Shift   Begins         AM/PM  
Ends         AM/PM  
 
SN Name and 
surname 
of 
employee  Age 
& 
Sex Class or kind 
of 
employment  Relay 
or set 
No. Serial 
No. from 
Form B 
Register  Time should be recorded against each entry  Total  
      Day Day Day Day Day Day Day No. of 
days 
worked  No. of 
hours 
worked  R 
E 
M 
A 
R 
K 
S 
 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 
      In  Out In  Out In  Out In  Out In  Out In  Out In  Out    
 
Initial of Register Keeper  
 Weekly Abstract  Miners 
including 
loaders  2*** Others  
 Total no. of attendances     
 
 Total no. of absentees.     
     
 
1. Inserted by GS R 1886 dated 25.12.1965  
2. Omitted by GSR 316 dated 26.4.1986  
 
 
  
FORM – E 
[See Rule 48(3) and 78]  
Register of persons employed above ground 1[otherwise than in opencast working] during the week commencing ------  and ending …. 19  
 
Name of Mine…….Part or Section of Mine………  
                   
     Name of Owner………..Hours of Shift   Begins         AM/PM  
Ends         AM/PM  
 
SN Name and 
surname 
of 
employee  Age 
& 
Sex Class or kind 
of 
employment  Relay 
or set 
No. Serial 
No. from 
Form B 
Register  Time should be recorded ag ainst each entry  Total  
      Day Day Day Day Day Day Day No. of 
days 
worked  No. of 
hours 
worked  R 
E 
M 
A 
R 
K 
S 
 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 
      In  Out In  Out In  Out In  Out In  Out In  Out In  Out    
 
Initial of Reg ister Keeper  
 Weekly Abstract  Men  Women  2 *** 
 Total no. of attendances     
 
 Total no. of absentees.     
     
 
  
 
 
            
    
 
 
 
1. Inserted by GSR 1886 dated 25.12.1965  
2. Omitted by GSR 316 dated 26.4.1986  
 
 
 
 
  
 
FORM F  
[See  Rule 49(4)]  
Register of Compen satory Days of Rest.  
 
      Name of Mine…………………  
      Name of Owner……………….  
      Year…………………………..  
 
Dates on which weekly days of rest have not been 
allowed  Dates on which compensatory days of rest have 
been allowed  SN Name & 
surname 
of 
employee  Class or kind 
of 
employment 
set or relay 
no. No. of days of 
compensatory 
rest due in the 
previous 
calendar year  1st 
January 
to 31st 
March  1st 
April 
to 30th 
June  1st July to 
30th 
September  1st October 
to 31st 
December  1st 
January 
to 31st 
March  1st April 
to 30th 
June 1st July to 
30th 
September  1st October 
to 31st 
December  No. of days 
of 
compensatory 
rest due on 
31st 
December  Remarks  
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 
 
             
 
  
 
 
 
  
Name of Mine………….  
Owner………………….  
FORM – G 
(See Rules 53)  
 
Name of Mine………………. . 
Name of Owner…………….  
 
Register of Leave Account during the Calendar Year…………..  
 
Actual Number of da ys worked during the year  Leave period due in ensuring 
year SN Name & 
surname 
of 
employee  Nature of 
employment 
mention 
whether 
above or 
below 
ground  Category of 
employment,  
mention 
whether 
monthly, 
weekly daily 
or  Jan Feb Mar Apr May  Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Total  Days of 
leave 
entitled  Arrears 
from 
previous 
year Total  R 
E 
M 
A 
R 
K 
S  
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 
                     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
FORM – H 
 
(See Rule 53 ) 
Register of Leave Account during the Calendar Year……………..  
 
Name of Mine…………………………  
Name of Owner………………………  
 
Leave Instalment  Leave Instalment  Leave Instalment  Arrears of 
Leave  SN Name 
and 
surnam
e of 
employ
ee Total 
leave 
period 
due in 
the 
year 
(from 
Form 
G) Calculate
d daily 
rate of 
wages or 
earnings 
including 
concessio
ns Period 
of 
leave 
availed  Calculat
ed leave 
wages 
for the 
period  Leave 
wages 
actual
ly 
paid Date 
of 
paym
ent Calculated 
daily rate o f 
wages or 
earnings 
including 
concessions  Perio
d of 
leave 
availe
d Calculat
ed leave 
wages 
for the 
period  Leave 
wages 
actuall
y paid  Date 
of 
paym
ent Calculate
d daily 
rate of 
wages or 
earnings 
including 
concessio
ns Peri
od 
of 
leav
e 
avail
ed Calculate
d leave 
wage s for 
the period  Leave 
wages 
actual
ly 
paid Date 
of 
paym
ent Per
iod A
mo
unt R 
E 
M 
A 
R 
K 
S 
 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 2
1 
                     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Note : The date of payment of arrears of leave wages shall be entered in the Remarks column.  
 
  
 1[FORM – I 
 
(See Rules 59)  
Register of  Overtime Wages  
 
 Name of Mine……………………  
Name of Owner…………………  
                                                                          Month …………………..  
Week ending  Week ending  Week ending  S 
N 
 Name  
& sur -
name  
of 
emplo - 
yee Name 
of 
work 
above 
or b/g  Class  
or 
kind  
 of 
emplo -
yment  Ordi-
nary 
rate 
 of 
wages  Over -
time  
rate  
of  
wages  Date  
of 
which  
over - 
time  
wor- 
ked No. 
of  
over - 
time  
hours  
wor-
ked 
on  
that  
date No.  
of  
over- 
time  
hours  
in the  
week  Over - 
time  
ear- 
nings  Date  
of  
pay- 
ment  Date  
of 
which  
over - 
time  
wor- 
ked No. 
of  
over- 
time  
hours  
wor-
ked 
on  
that  
date No.  
of  
over- 
time  
hours  
in the  
week  Over - 
time  
ear- 
nings  Date  
of  
pay- 
ment  Date  
of 
which  
over- 
time  
wor- 
ked No. 
of  
over - 
time  
hours  
wor-
ked 
on  
that  
date No.  
of  
over - 
time  
hours  
in the  
week  Over - 
time  
ear- 
nings  Date  
of  
pay- 
ment  
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 
                     
 
Week ending  Week ending  
Date  
of 
which  
over- 
time  
wor- 
ked No. 
of  
over - 
time  
hours  
wor-
ked 
on  
that  
date No.  
of  
over - 
time  
hours  
in the  
week  Over - 
time  
ear- 
nings  Date  
of  
pay- 
ment  Date  
of 
which  
over- 
time  
wor- 
ked No. 
of  
over - 
time  
hours  
wor-
ked 
on  
that  
date No.  
of  
over- 
time  
hours  
in the  
week  Over - 
time  
ear- 
nings  Date  
of  
pay- 
ment  R 
E 
M 
A 
R 
K 
S  
22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 
           
 
 
1. Substituted by GSR 1786 dated 17.10.1970  
 
 
 
  
 1[FORM – J] 
 2[See Rule 76 (1)  
 
* (Return of Reportable accident)  
      Name of Mine………………….  
      State…… …District……………  
      Owner………………………….  
    Mineral worked………………(Quarter ending)  1[Return of reportable accident]  
 
Classification  Sl. 
No. 
  Date of 
entry  
   Date of 
accident  
  Time of 
accident  
  By place 
of 
accident  By cause  Brief 
description of 
case of 
accident  Name of injured 
worker  
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 
 
        
 
Sl. No. 
from 
Register in 
Form B  Nature of 
employm
ent Natur
e of 
injury  Parts of 
body 
injured  Date of 
return of 
injured 
person to 
work  Duration of 
enforced 
absence (in 
days)  Initials of 
attend ing 
medical 
practitioner  Remarks  
9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 
        
 
Introduction :  
 
Col (5) : Specify as indicated in Annexure – 1 Col (6): Specify as indicated in Annexure – II, Col. (7) : 
Give brief description of the circumstances attending the accident . 
Col. (11) : Specify whether simple wound laceration abrasion of fracture (only toes, fingers and thumb etc)  
Col. (14) : mention the days intervening the days of occurrence and day of rejoining and not including 
either the date of occurrence or rejoining.    
Col. (16) : In case if an injury proves “Serious” or “Fatal” or when injured person proceeds on leave or 
leaves his employment. Particulars should be entered in this column.  
 3[Note : Copies of entries person injured in preceding quarter(s) and who cont inued to absent in the quarter 
should also be submitted separately]  
 
 
1. Substituted by GSR 1786 dated 17.10.1970  
2. Substituted by GSR 316 dated 26.4.1986  
3. Inserted, ibid.  
 
 
  
 
ANNEXURE – 1 
 
Classification of Accident  
By place of work (Column – 5) 
1. Below ground : 
 
1.1. Development face  
1.2. Other Development area  
1.3. Longwall face  
1.4. Other Depillaring /stopping area  
1.5. Tramming roadway  
1.6. Other rope haulage roadways  
1.7. Shafts and sinking shaft (including inclined shafts)  
1.8. Inclines and Winzes  
1.9. Other (Specify)  
 
2. Opencast Workings :  
 
2.1. Bottom Bench  
2.2. Top of the Quarry  
2.3. Other benches  
2.4. Rope Haulage roadway  
2.5. Other Transportation roadways  
2.6. Other (Specify)  
 
3. Aboveground (Excluding Opencast Workings) :  
 
3.1. Aerial Ropeway –site 
3.2. Rope Haulage Roadways  
3.3. Other transportation Roadways  
3.4. Railway line belonging to the  mine  
3.5. Site of ore handling plants (including screening plants Dressing Plants, Crushing Plants, etc)  
3.6. Workshop, Power -house and other engine rooms  
3.7. Depot  
3.8. Other (Specify)  
 
ANNEXURE – II 
 
 
Classification of accidents by cause (Column 6)  
 
1.Ground movements :  
 
1.2 Fall of roof  
1.3 Fall of sides (other than overhang)  
1.3   Fall of overhang  
1.4   Rock Burst of Bump  
1.5   Air Blast  
1.6   Premature collapse of workings/pillars  
1.7   Subsidence  
1.8   Landside  
1.9   Collapse of shaft  
 
2.   Transportation Machinery (Winding in shaft)  
3.  Transportation Machinery (other than winding in shaft):  
 
  
 
3.1 Aerial Ropeway  
3.2 Rope Haulage  
3.3 Other Rail Transportation  
3.4 Mechanical conveyors  
3.5 Dumpers and other heavy earth movers  
3.6 Other wheeled trackless means of transportation (Trucks, lorries, etc.)  
 
4. Machinery -other than Transportation Machinery :  
 
4.1 Drills  
4.2 Coal cutting Machinery  
4.3 Coal Loading Machinery  
4.4 Haulage Engine  
4.5 Winding Engine  
4.6Shovels, Draglines, Excavators etc.  
4.7 Ore handling Plants (including crushing an d screening plants)  
4.8 Pumps  
4.9   Other (specify)  
 
5. Explosive  
6. Electricity  
7. Dust Gas and other combustible material :  
 
7.1 Occurrence of gas  
7.2 Influx of gas  
7.3 Suffocation by gases  
7.4 Explosion or ignition of gas/ dust etc.  
7.5 Outbreak of fire or spontaneous heating  
7.6 Others (Specify)  
 
 8. Falls (other than falls of ground) :  
 
8.1 Falls of persons from heights or into depths  
8.2 Falls of persons on the same level  
8.3 Falls of objects other than falls of ground  
8.4 Other falls (Specify)  
 
 9. Other  Cause :  
 
9.1 Irruption of water  
9.2 Flying pieces  
9.3 Extremity caught  in between objects  
9.4 Unclassified (Specify)  
 
 
  
 
FORM – K 
 1[See Rule 76 (2)]  
Return of Minor Accidents  
 
      Name of Mine……………..  
      State………….District…………  
      Owner……………………….  
     Mineral worked…………(Quarter ending on…)  
 
 
Classification  Sl. 
No. Date of 
entry  Date of 
accident  Time of 
accident  By place of 
accident  By cause  Brief description 
of case of accident  Name of 
injured worker  
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5.        
 
Sl. No. from 
Register in 
Form B  Nature of 
employment  Nature 
of injury  Parts of body 
injured  Date of return of 
injured person to 
work  Initial of attending 
medical practitioner  Remarks  
9 10 11 12 13 14 15 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5.       
 
Introduction :  
 
Col (5) : Specify as indicated in Annexure – 1  to Form J.       Col (6): Specify as indicated in Annexure – II 
to From J.          Col. (7) : Give brief description of the circumstances attending the accident.  
Col. (11) : Specify whether simple wound lacerati on abrasion of fracture   
Col. (15)  : In case if an injury proves “reportable” “Serious” or “Fatal” or when injured person proceeds on 
leave or leaves his employment. Particulars should be entered in this column.  
1. Substituted by GSR 316 dated 26.4.1986  
 
 
 
 
  
1[FORM – L 
 
(See Rule 54)  
Information regarding leave with Wages  
Name and 
surname 
of 
employee  Serial 
number 
from 
Register 
in Form 
“B” Nature of 
employment 
whether below 
ground or above 
ground  Actual number 
of days worked 
during the 
preceding year  Days of leave 
with wages 
enjoyed during 
the preceding 
year Days of 
leave to 
which he is 
entitled  Arrears 
of leave 
carried 
over 
from the 
previous 
year Total 
number of 
days of 
leave with 
wages  Remarks 
if any  
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 
         
 
      Signature  
      Designation: Owner/agent/manager  
      Mine :  
      Owner :  
Dated ………………………….  
 
* Inserted vide Notification No. GSR 1786, dated 30.9.1970  
 2{FORM M}  
 
(See rule 29D (1)}  
 
Notice of initial/ periodical medical examination under rule 29B  
 
No…………..     Date………………… . 
 
Sri/Srimati………………. Nature of employment**……………… Serial number from B Register** 
son/daughter or/wife* of …………. Is hereby notified that he/she* should present himself/herself* for 
an initial/periodical* medical examination, under rule 29B of the Mines Ru les 1955, before…..(give 
name of the examining authority) at ……..(give exact description of place) on *** ………… (give 
date) at …….. (give time).  
 
Shri/Shrimati*…………. May note that if he/she* fails, without reasonable cause, to submit 
himself/herself* for th e medical examination aforesaid he/she shall not be eligible for 
appointment/continuance in employment to the mine from………………  
 
Shri/Shrimati*……………. May further note that he/she* should bring with him/her* three unattested 
photographs of himself/herself* an d the previous medical certificates in Form O, if any, issued to 
him/her* under rule 29 F.  
 
                     Signature of manager  
       …………………mine  
           *Delete whatever is not applicable  
**  Necessary only in case of a person already employed i n the mine.  
*** In respect of the initial medical examination of a person already employed in a mine and in respect 
of every periodical medical examination atleast twenty days prior notice is to be given. In respect of 
the initial medical examination of a person seeking employed at a mine the period of notice may be 
shorter.  
 
 Note – A copy of the notice shall be sent to the examining authority concerned. In the case of 
periodical  medical examination, the copy of medical certificate in Form O shall also be  sent.  
1. Inserted by GSR 1786 dated 17.10.1970  
2. Inserted by GSR 557(E) dated 16.11.1978  
 
  
  
1{FORM – N} 
 
{See rule 29D (S)}  
 
 
Second and final notice of initial/periodical medical examination under rule 29 B  
 
No………       Date………….  
 
Shri/Shrimati*…………… Nature of employment………… Serial number from Form B 
Register……… Son/daughter/wife of ………. Failed to present himself/herself* for an 
initial/periodical* medical examination on…… in respect of which he/she/had been given a notice on 
………….  
 
 He/She* is hereby again noti fied that he/she* should present himself/herself* for an 
initial/periodical* medical examination, under rule 29B of the Mines Rules, 1955, before……….(give 
name of the examining authority) at ……(give date)** ……..at……….(give time)  
 
 Shri/Shrimati*…………, may n ote that if he/she* fails to submit himself/herself* for the medical 
examination aforesaid, he/she* shall not be employed/retained in employment in the mine from………  
 
 Shri/Shrimati*………….., may further note that he/she* should bring with him/her* three 
unmo unted photographs of himself/herself* and he previous medical certificate in Form O, if any, 
issued to him/her* under rule 29F.  
 
     
       Signature of Manager  
 
(a) Delete whatever is not applicable.  
** In respect of the initial medical examination of a pers on already employed in a mine and in respect 
of every periodical medical examination, the second notice is to be given at lest ten days previously.  
 
1 Inserted vide Notification No. GSR 656, dated 5.6.1980.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
1(FORM – O) 
(See rule 29F (2) and 29L)  
 
Report of medical examination under rule 29B  
(To be issued in triplicate)**  
Certificate No…………..  
 
 Certified that Shri/Shrimati* employed as ………. In ………mine, Form B No. has been 
examined for an initial/periodical medical examination. He/she* appears to be………… years of age. The 
findings of the examining authority are given in the attached sheet. It is considered that 
Shri/Shrimati*…………..  
 
(a)* is medically fit for any employment in mines.  
(b)* is suffering from…………. and is medically unfit for  
(b) any employment in mine; or  
(c) any employment below ground; or  
(d) any employment or work……….  
 
©* is suffering from………… is should get this disability* cured/controlled and should be again examined 
within a period of ………..months. He/She will appear  for re -examinati on with the result of test 
of…………  and the opinion of …………Specialist from………… He/She may be permitted/not* 
permitted to carry on his duties during this period.  
 
 
Space for affixing Passport  
Size Photograph of the  
Candidate.       Signature of the examining a uthority  
       …………………………………………  
Place :       Name and designation in Block letters  
Date  :  
* Delete whatever is not applicable.  
** One copy of the certificate shall be handed over to the person concerned and another copy 
shall be sent to the manager of th e mine concerned by registered post; and the third copy shall 
be retained by the examining authority,  
 
Report of the examining authority  
(to be filled in for every medical examination whether initial or periodical or re -examination or after 
cure/control of  disability).  
 
Annexure to Certificate No…………as result of medical examination on …….  
Identification Mark……………..  
     Left thumb impression of  
     The candidate  
1. General development -  Good/Fair/Poor  
2.Height…………Cms.  
3.Weight…………kg.  
4Eyes :  
(i)Visual acui ty-Distant vision (with or without glasses).  
Right eye……..Left eye…………..  
(ii) any organic disease of eyes  
(iii)night blindness  
(iv)Colour blindness  
      (v)Squint  
 
(* to be tested in special cases)  
1. Inserted vide notification No.GSR 656 dated 5.6.1980  
 
  
(e)  Ears :  
(f) Hearing : right ear………….Left ear ……………..  
(g) Any organic diseases.  
 
6.Respiratory system.  
   Chest measurement :  
 
(i)after full inspiration …………cms.  
(ii)After full expiration…………..cms.  
 
7. Circulatory system:  
 
Blood Pressure  
Pulse  
 
8.  Abdomen :  
Tendern ess. 
Liver.  
Spleen.  
Tumour.  
9. Nervous system:  
History of fits or epilepsy  
Paralysis.  
Mental health.  
10.Locomotory system  
11. Skin.  
12. Hydrocele.  
13. Hernia.  
14. Any other abnormality  
15. Urine :  
Reaction.  
Albumin.  
Sugar.  
16. Skiagram of chest.  
17. Any other test co nsidered necessary by the examining authority.  
18. Any opinion of specialist considered necessary.  
 
 
Signature of the examining authority  
 
 
Place:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
1(FORM – P) 
 
(See rule 29F (i) and 29L)  
 
Medical Standard of fitness for Persons Employed  
 
1. The pers on should be in good mental and bodily health and free from any physical defect likely to 
interfere with his efficient employment in a mine.  
2. Skeletal nervous system : The limbs should be well formed and developed, and the function of all the 
limbs should b e within normal limits. Any deformity should be recorded. There should be no 
deformity or paralysis which may interfere with his efficient employment in a mine.  
3. Skin : - There should be no evidence of extensive and chronic skin disease or ulceration. In cas e of 
infective type of skin disease, the candidate could be made fit after he has undergone a treatment. All 
occupational skin diseases should be noted.  
4. (a) Eye vision should be not less than the following standard:  
 
(1) Better eye    6/12 
(2) Worse eye    6/18 
(b)  There should be no night blindness for persons employed  below ground and for persons 
employed in open cast working in shifts other than in mornings shifts.  
(c)  A person having only one eye which functions normally should not be employed below 
ground, For employment on surface the vision of such a person in the other eye should be 6/18 
with or without glasses.  
5. Hearing should be good, Any progressive disease affecting hearing/or occupational deafness should be 
recorded.  
 
6. Speech must be without serious impediment. Unless this is also accompanied by generalised partial 
paralysis this should not be a reason for declaring unfit.  
 
7.  (a) Respiratory system should be sound and free from any chronic bronchial or laryngeal disease. 
This however alone should no t be reason to make unfit.  
  
(b)  2[A full sized pestero -anterior chest radiograph (large) enough to include thoratic inlet and 
both costophrenic angles obtained by an X -ray machine of atleast 300 mA Milli -Ampere) 
strength shall be evaluated in the manner speci fied by the Chief Inspector and Lung function 
tests (spirometry) to record forced vital capacity (FVC) and forced expiratory volume in one 
second (FEVI) shall be made. There should not be any evidence of active pulmonary disease 
if] there are evidences of active pulmonary tuberculosis, he may be permitted to work if his 
sputum is negative on repeated examination and on production of a certificate that he is taking 
treatment from a qualified medical practioner/hospital  
 
8. Circulatory system – There should b e no evidence  of any heart or vascular disease which may interfere 
with his efficient employment in a mine.  
 
9.  In case the candidate has hernia he may be declared fit after he has been successfully operated for the 
same.  
10.  Hydrocele if present should not be l arge enough to impede the normal activities off the candidate. In 
such cases he may be declared fit after being successfully operated.  
11.  The medical examination should include examination of urine and of other system for evidence of 
disease. Mere presence of  albumen and sugar in the urine without any gross organic disease producing 
signs and symptoms should not be considered as a disability.  
 
 
1. Inserted vide notification No. GSR 656 dated 5.6.1980  
2. Substituted by GSR 707(E) dated 21.7.1989  
 
 
  
1(FORM – P-I) 
 
(See  rule 29F(1) and 29L)  
 
Medical standard of fitness for persons to be employed in mines.  
 
1. The person should be in good mental and bodily health and free from any physical defect likely to 
interfere with his efficient employment in a mine. Due allowance i n the standard should be made for the 
age of a candidate.  
 
2. Locomotor system – The limbs should be well formed and developed and the function of all the limbs 
should be within normal limits. Any deformity should be recorded. There should be no deformity or 
paralysis which may interfere with his efficient employment in a mine. Any deformity noted should be 
recorded.  
 
3. Skin – There should be no evidence of extensive and chronic skin disease or ulceration.  
 
4. (a) Distant vision eye with or without glasses  should be not less than the following standard.  
For workers employed on   For workers employed  
Surface and in opencast   below ground  
Workings  
1. Better eye   6/12    6/6 
2. Worse eye   6/18    6/9 
 (b) Night blindness should be tested in special cases only i n underground workers where the examining 
authority considers it necessary.  
 
(c) A person having only one eye which functions normally should not be employed belowground. For 
employment on surface the vision of such a person in the other eye should be 6/12  with or without glasses. 
A person will be considered uni -ocular when there is physical loss of one eye or when there in functional 
loss of vision of one eye.  
 
(d) Colour blindness will be tested only in special cases where the job requires good colour dis crimination. 
Only low grade colour perceptions will be tested with Edridge Green’s lantern.  
 
(e) There should not be squint where binocular vision is essential.  
 
(f) There should not be any organic disease of the eye which is likely to affect the distant v ision within a 
period of five years.  
 
5. Hearing should be good. Any progressive disease effecting hearing should be recorded. The candidate 
should be able to hear conversational voice from a distance of 3 metres.  
 
6. Speech must be without serious impedim ents.  
 
7. (a) Respiratory system should be sound and free from any chronic laryngeal bronchial pulmonary 
disease. Tuberculosis of lungs if not active should not be a disqualification.  
 
(b) 2[A full sized pestero -anterior chest radiograph (large) enough to inc lude thoratic inlet and both 
costophrenic angles obtained by an X -ray machine of atleast 300 mA Milli -Ampere) strength shall be 
evaluated in the manner specified by the Chief Inspector and Lung function tests (spirometry) to record 
forced vital capacity (F VC) and forced expiratory volume in one second (FEVI) shall be made. There 
should not be any evidence of active pulmonary disease if] there are evidences of active pulmonary 
tuberculosis, he may be permitted to work if his sputum is negative on repeated ex amination and on 
production of a certificate that he is taking treatment from a qualified medical practioner/hospital  
1. Substituted by GSR 707(E) dated 21.7.1989  
2. Substituted, ibid  
 
  
8.Circulatory system : - There should be no evidence of cardiac or vascul ar disease which may interfere 
with his efficient employment in a mine.  
 
9. There should not be any evidence of disease of abdominal organs which is likely to affect his efficient 
discharge of duty in a mine.  
 
10. In case the candidate has hernia, he may b e declared fit after he has been successfully operated for the 
same.  
 
11. Hydrocele if present should not be large enough to impede the normal activities of the person. If it is 
large enough he may be declared fit after being successfully operated.  
 
12. Th e nervous system should be sound. Persons with history of epilepsy or any other type of organic or 
historical fits should not be declared fit for employment in a mine.  
 
13. The medical examination should include examination of urine. Mere presence of album en and sugar in 
the urine without any gross organic disease producing signs and symptoms should not be a disability.  
 
14. Skiagram of the chest should also he obtained. If it is necessary the medical officer may direct the 
candidate to obtain the result of  special tests or/and the opinion of a specialist from recognised 
institution/hospital.  
 
(FORM – Q) 
 
(See rule 29J(2) 9 (a))  
 
Notice of medical re -examination by Appellate Medical Board  
 
No………..      Date………………..  
 
MEMORANDUM  
 
SHRI/Shrimati*………..Nature of em ployment……………serial number from Form B Register………… 
son/daughter/wife* of ………….., who has appealed for a re -examination against the findings of a medical 
examination under rule 29B of Mines Rules, 1955 that he/she is unfit for :  
 
a. * Any employment in mines.  
 
b. * Any employment below………. Ground.  
 
c. * Any employment on work………..(Specify in detail) is hereby notified that he/she should 
present himself/herself* for a medical re -examination by the Appellate Medical Board at 
………. (give exact description of place) on** ………….(give date) at ……….(Give 
time).  
 
 
Shri/Shrimati*…….may note that if he/she* fails without reasonable cause, to submit 
himself/herself* for the medical re -examination aforesaid he/she* shall not be retained in 
employment in the mine.  
 
       Signature of manager  
 
      ……………………mine.  
 
*Delete whatever is not applicable  
**15 days, prior notice is to be given to a medical re -examination by the Appellate Medical Board.  
 
  
  
 (FORM – R) 
 
(See rule 29J(2) (b) )  
 
Second and final notice of medical re -examination by Appellate  
 
              Medical Board  
 
No…………..     Date……………19  
 
MEMORANDUM  
 
 
SHRI/Shrimati*………..Nature of employment……………serial number from Form B Register………… 
son/daughter/wife* of …………..,  failed to present himself/herself* for medical re -examination  on …..in 
respect of which he/she* had been given a notice on …………  
 
He/She* is hereby again notified that he/she* should present himself/herself* for a medical re -examination 
by the Appellate Medical Board at ……..(give exact description of place) on**……….( give date) at 
…………(give time).  
 
Shri/Shrimati*…..may note that if he/she* fails to submit himself/herself* for the medical re -examination 
aforesaid, he/she* shall not be retained in employment in the mine.  
 
 
      Signature of Manager  
      ……………….. mine.  
 
 
 
*   Delete whatever is not applicable.  
**15 days’ prior notice is to be given of medical re -examination by the Appellate Medical Board.  
 
(FORM – S) 
 
(See rule 29L)  
 
Report of medical re -examination by Appellate Medical Board  
 
(To be issued in triplicate )** 
 
We do hereby certify that we have examined Shri/Shrimati* ……….. Nature of 
employment…….., Serial Number from Form B Register………….. of ….. mine, who has been 
declared medically unfit for.  
 
5. * any employment in mine.  
6. * any employment belowground.  
7. * any e mployment in work……….  
 
(Specify in details)  
 
as a result of a medical examination under rule 29B. Our Report is given overleaf.  
 
 
 
 
  
 We consider that – 
 
1. He/She* is medically fit for any employment in mine.  
 
2.  He/She* is suffering from……….. and is medic ally unfit for  
 
 (a) * any employment in mine.  
(b) * any employment belowground.  
(c)  * any employment in work……….  
       ________________________________  
    (Specify in details)  
 
3. He/She is suffering from…..and should get this disability/cured/controll ed* and should be again 
examined within a period of ……………months. He will appear for re -examination within a period 
of…………months. He will appear for re -examination with the result of test of………* and opinion of 
………specialist from…………He may be permitted/not p ermitted* to carry on his duties during this 
period.  
        
  Signature of members of  
      Appellate Medical Board  
      1…………………(Convenor)  
      2………….. 3……………  
* Delete whichever is not applicable  
**One copy of the certificate shall be handed over to th e person concerned and another copy shall be sent to the manager of the mine 
concerned by registered post, and the third copy shall be retained by the Convener of the Appellate Medical Board.  
 
REPORT OF THE APPLELLATE MEDICAL BOARD  
 
Annexure to certificate  No………….as result of Medical examination identification mark :  
 
On…………….     Left thumb impression  
      Of the candidate  
 
1. General development.   Good/Fair/Poor  
2. Height……….cms.   3. Weight……….kg.  
4. (i) Eyes………visual acuity  Distant vision(with or withou t glasses)  
(ii) any organic disease of eyes.  
*(iii) night blindness    Right eye………Left eye………….  
*(iv) Colour blindness……….(v) Squint…………………..  
 
 (* to be tested in special cases)  
 
5. Ears :  
 
(i) Hearing………(ii) any organic disease  
 
6. Respiratory system :  
 
     Chest measurement  
8. after full inspiration …….cms (ii) after full expiration……  
 
7. Circulatory system :  
Blood pressure…………. Pulse…………..  
8. Abdomen :  
Tenderness……..Liver……..Spleen…………Tumour………..  
9. Nervous system :  
History of fits or epilepsy…..Paralysis… …..Mental health………  
 
  
10. Locomotion system :  
11. Skin :  
12. Hernia :  
13.Hydrocele :  
14.Any other abnormality :  
Urine:  Reaction……..  Albumin………  Sugar………..  
15.Skiagram of chest :  
16.Any other test considered necessary by the examining authority.  
17.Any opinion  of specialist considered necessary.  
 
Place :     Signature of the Appellate Medical Board  
 
(FORM – T) 
 
(See rule 29 -P(i))  
 
Annual Return for the year ending on the 31st December  
 
1. Name of mines………………  
2. Postal address of Mines……………  
3. Date of opening ……… ………..  
4. Date of closing (if closed)………….  
5. Situation of Mine (District/State)…………..  
6. Name of Owner………..Postal address of owner…………  
7.  Number of persons required to be medically examined……….  
9.        Number of persons medically examined……………  
10.        Numbe r of persons declared medically unfit…………  
11.      Categorisation of the persons declared unfit………….  
 
Certified that the information given above is correct to the best of my knowledge.  
Date………………     Signature……………..  
(No. S. 650/2/1/72 -M.L.)  
 1(FORM – U) 
 
(See rule 29R and S)  
 
Name of Mine………Owner…………Manager……………..Place/installation inspected…………………..  
Inspected by ………………on ……………Accompanied by………………  
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ------------  
Observations   Remedial  Action taken   Date on  Remarks  
   Measures  for remedial   which action if any  
   Suggested  measures   taken  
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------------  
Signature of Workmen’s   Signature of Manager  
Inspector with date  
 
Signature of mine official  
Accompanying the work - 
Men’s Inspector  
 
Date……..Designation  
1. Inserted by GSR 316 dated 26.4.1986  
