 
 
 
THE MINES RESCUE RULES, 1985 
 
           1G.S.R. 325 (E) the 29 th March, 1985.- Whereas the draft of the Mines Rescue Rules, 1984 was 
published as required by sub-section (1) of section 59 of the Mines Act, 1952 (35 of 1952), in the Gazette 
of India Extraordinary Par- II Section 3- Sub-section (I) dated ;the 3
rd July 1984 under the notification of 
the Government of India in the then Ministry of Labour and Rehabilitation (Department of Labour) No. 
G.S.R. 492(E) dated the 3
rd July, 1984, inviting objections or suggestions from all persons likely to be 
affected thereby, till the expiry of a period of three months from the date of publication of the said 
notification in the Official Gazette; 
 
 And whereas the said Gazette was made available to the public on the 3 rd July, 1984; 
 
 And  whereas; the objections and suggestions received from the public on the said draft have been 
considered by the Central Government. 
 
 Now, therefore, in exercise of the powers conferr3ed by clauses ® to (1) and clauses (v) and (W) 
of section 58 of the said Act, the Central Government, after referring the said draft to the Mining Boards 
constituted under the said Act and after giving such Board a reasonable opportunity of reporting as to the 
expediency of making the said rules and as to the suitability thereof as required by sub-section (4) of 
section 59 of the said Act hereby makes the following rules, namely:- 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
Preliminary 
 
1. Short title, application; and commencement:- (1) These Rules  may be called the Mines Rescue Rules, 
1985. 
 
(2) They shall apply to below ground mines. 
 
(3) They shall come into force on the 2
nd April, 1985. 
 
2. Definitions:- In these rules, unless there is any thing repugnant to the subject or context:- 
 
(a) “Act” means the Mines Act, 1952; 
 
(b) “below ground mine” means any excavation which extends below superjacent ground; 
 
(c) “Board of Mining Examination” means the Board of Mining Examinations constituted under the 
Coal Mines Regulations, 1957 or the Metalliferous Mines Regulation, 1961 as the case may be; 
 
(d) “Chief Inspector” means the Chief Inspector of Mines appointed under section 5 of the Act; 
 
 
 
(e) “Foreman’s Certificate” means the foreman’s certificate granted by the Board of Mining 
Examination; 
 
(f) “Inspector” means an Inspector of Mines appointed under the Act, and includes a district 
magistrate when exercising any power or performing any duty of an; Inspector which he is 
empowered by the Act to exercise or perform; 
 
(g) “Instructor” means a person appointed as such under sub-rule (2) of rule 3. 
 
(h) “Manager” means a person appointed under section 17 of the act; 
 
(i)   “Manager’s Certificate” means the manager’s certificate granted by the Board of Mining 
Examination ; 
 
(j)  “Ordinarily employed” with reference to any mine or part thereof means the average number  of 
persons employed per day in the mine or part of mine during the preceding calendar year ( 
obtained by dividing the number of man-days worked by the number of working days excluding 
rest days and other non-working days); 
   
(k) “Overman’s Certificate” means the overman’s certificate granted by the Board of Mining 
Examinations; 
 
 
1.Published in the Gazette of India, Extraordinary, 1985, Part II, Section 3(I), Sl. No. 142. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(1)“Owner” means a person; who is the immediate proprietor or lessees /or occupier of the mine or 
of any part thereof and in the case of a mine the business where of  is being carried on by a liquidator or 
receiver, such liquidator or receiver buy does not include a person who merely receives a royalty, rent or 
fine from the mine, or is merely the proprietor of the mine, subject to any lease; grant or licence for 
working thereof, or is merely the owner of the soil and ;not interested in the minerals of the mine ; but any 
contractor or sub-lessee for the working of a mine or part thereof shall be subject to the Act in like manner 
as if he was an owner, but not so as to exempt the owner from any liability; 
 
(m)”Principal Official” means the senior – most mine official in mining discipline on duty in the 
mine; 
 
(n) “Qualified medical practitioner “ means a medical practitioner who possess  any recognised 
medical qualification as defined in clause (h) of section 2 of the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 and who 
is enrolled on a State Medical register as defined in clause (k) of that section; 
 
 
(o) “ rescue room” means a rescue room as established and maintained, under rules; 
 
 
(p) “rescue station” means a rescue station established and maintained under rule 3; 
 
 
(q) “rescue trained person” means a person certified by the Superintendent to be rescue trained 
person under sub –rule (1) of rule 21; 
 
® “Schedule” means a Schedule appended to these rules; 
 
(s) “Superintendent” means a superintendent of rescue station appointed under sub-rule (2) of 
rule3. 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
 
RESCUE STATIONS AND RESCUE ROOMS 
 
 
3. Establishment and location of rescue station;- (1) The Chief Inspector may  permit or require; the 
owner of a below ground mine or a group of below ground mines to establish and maintain rescue 
station, stations with such designs and specifications and at; such place/ places as may be considered 
necessary in consultation with the owner: 
 
Provided that where there are below ground mines belonging to more than one owner, the Chief 
Inspector  may permit or require two or more owners to jointly establish a common rescue station: 
 
Provided further that all the existing rescue stations as on the date of ;coming into force of these rule, 
shall continue to function for a period of three years from that date. 
 
(2) At every rescue station there shall be appointed one Superintendent and at least two instructions 
and also, there shall be maintained a rescue brigade of not less tan eighteen rescue trained persons. 
 
(3) In case  where the absence of the Superintendent at a rescue station exceeds 60 days, the owner 
shall appoint another Superintendent. 
 
(4)The owner shall, within seven days from the date of assumption or relinquishment of charge by the 
Superintendent , inform the Chief Inspector and ;the Inspector in-charge of the region where the mine is 
situated (hereinafter referred to as Regional Inspector) in Form I. 
 
4. Functions of rescue stations:- The functions of rescue station shall include:- 
  
(i) imparting initial training in rescue and recovery work; 
 
       (ii)   imparting refresher training to rescue trained persons; 
 
(iii) providing support by its own rescue teams and equipment in case of major accidents or long-
lasting rescue and recovery operations; and 
 
(iv) carrying out the functions of rescue room in respect of these below ground mines where there is no 
rescue room. 
 
5.Establishment and location of rescue rooms:- (1) At every below ground mine where, more than 100 
persons are ordinarily employed below ground and there is no rescue station within its radius of 35 kms. 
The owner, shall establish and ;maintain on surface close to mine entrance a rescue room: 
 
 Provided that it may be sufficient to provide one rescue room for a number of mines belonging to 
the same owner where:- 
 
(a) the total number of persons ordinarily employed in below ground workings of all such mines 
does not exceed 5000; and 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(b) The mines are situated radius of 35 kms. From and connected by road with the rescue room : 
 
Provided further that the Chief Inspector may permit the owner of a group of mines having the 
total number of persons ordinarily employed below ground in excess of 5000, to use the rescue 
room as a rescue station excepting  the functions of imparting initial training in rescue  work, if 
such rescue room is :- 
 
(a) equipped with requisite additional rescue apparatus including at least 15 extra sets of two hour 
self- contained breathing apparatus; and 
 
(b) placed under the charge of a person holding the qualifications prescribed under rule 8 and a 
minimum of five rescue trained persons of whom at least one shall hold the qualifications 
prescribed under rule 10, are posted thereat. 
 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-rule (1) in the case of below ground coal mines 
having a fiery seam or gassy seam of second or third  degree, the Chief Inspector may, for reasons 
to be recorded in writing require the owner to establish and maintain a rescue room irrespective of 
the number of persons ordinarily employed below ground therein. 
 
(3)At each rescue room, there shall be appointed such number of rescue trained persons as may be 
necessary and one of them possessing the qualifications specified in rule 10 shall be made incharge of the 
rescue room. At least one rescue trained person shall always be in attendance at the rescue room. 
 
 6. Functions of rescue room:- A rescue room shall provide facilities for the storage, assembly, 
testing and adjustments of breathing apparatus and other rescue equipment and apparatus and for their 
speedy transport to mines. 
 
7. Qualifications, experience etc. of Superintendent:- After coming into force of these rules, no person 
shall be appointed as Superintendent unless he:- 
 
(j)        is a  rescue trained  person ; 
(ii) has 5 years practical experience of below ground work in mines; and 
(iii) holds a First Class Manager’s  Certificate of a type not restricted to open cast workings. 
 
8. Qualifications, experience etc., of Instructors:- After; the coming into force of these rules no person 
shall be appointed as Instructor unless he:- 
 
(i) is a rescue trained person; 
 
(ii) has 3 years practical experience of blow ground  work in mines; and 
 
 
(iii) holds a Manager’s certificate of a type not restricted to open cast workings. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9. Selection of rescue trained persons for posting at rescue stations:- (1) After coming into force of 
these rules the rescue trained  persons for posting at a  rescue station  shall  be selected, from amongst the 
rescue trained persons employed in mines served by the rescue station, by the Superintendent in 
consultation with the managers of such mines. 
 
(2) A person selected under sub-rule (1) shall be posted for not less than one year and not more 
than five years at a rescue station at any one time. 
 
10. Qualifications, experience etc. of rescue room incharge:- No person shall be appointed as 
rescue room incharge unless he:- 
 
(i) is a rescue trained person; 
(ii) has 3 years practical experience of below ground work in mines ; and 
(iii) holds a Manager’s , Overman’s or Foreman’s Certificate of a type not restricted to open 
cast workings. 
 
11. Equipments:- (1) At every rescue station there shall be provided and maintained for immediate 
use, apparatus and equipment as specified in Schedule I. 
 
(2) At every rescue room there shall be provided and maintained for immediate use, apparatus and 
equipment as specified in Schedule II. 
 
       (3)At a below ground mine, where no rescue room is located, apparatus  and equipment as 
specified in Schedule III, shall be maintained at the entrance of such mine.  
 
(4)Self- contained breathing apparatus provided at a rescue station and that at rescue rooms under 
it shall be of the same type and make. 
 
(5)The following apparatus and equipments provided in pursuance of sub-rules (1), (2) and (3), 
shall be of a type or standard approved by the Chief Inspector, namely:- 
 
(a) breathing apparatus; 
(b) smoke helmets and apparatus serving the same purpose; 
(c) reviving apparatus; 
(d) electric safety lamps and flame safety lamps; 
(e) gas detector; and 
(f) self rescuers. 
 
 
 
(6) All breathing apparatus and every flow meter shall be adjusted; and tested and the purity of 
oxygen for use in breathing apparatus shall be tested in such manners as are laid down in Schedule IV. 
 
(7)In case of an accident in a below ground mine arising out of the use of any rescue apparatus, a 
written report thereof shall be sent, within 24 hours of such accident, by the manager of the mine to the 
Chief Inspector and Regional Inspector in Form II appended to mines rules.  
 
(8)In case of an accident in a rescue station or rescue room arising out of the use of any rescue 
apparatus a written report thereof shall be sent , within 24 hours of such accident, by the Superintendent to 
the Chief Inspector and Regional Inspector in Form II aforesaid. 
 
(9)No absorbent charges, chemicals, self-rescuer and gas detector tubes shall be kept at al rescue 
station, rescue room or below ground mine for use beyond the expiry date, which shall be legibly marked 
on the boxes thereof. 
  
 
CHAPTER III 
 
Duties and responsibilities of superintendents etc. 
 
12.Duties and responsibilities of Superintendent.- (1) The Superintendent shall be in overall 
control of the rescue station and the rescue rooms served by such rescue station. 
 
(2)The Superintendent shall ensure that all the rescue equipment and apparatus kept at the rescue 
station, rescue rooms and at the entrance of the below ground mines under his control are- 
 
 
(a) maintained in perfect working order; 
(b) inspected by Instructors at specified intervals; and 
(c) tests are conducted and adjustments are made. 
 
(3)The Superintendent shall ensure that adequate stock of spare parts and supplies are kept for 
maintaining rescue equipment and apparatus in perfect working order. 
 
(4)The Superintendent shall countersign the records maintained under sub-rule (1) of rule 13. 
 
(5)The Superintendent shall ensure that persons selected for initial training and those undergoing 
refresher training receive the prescribed course of instructions and practices and are issued  the credit 
certificates for the same. 
 
(6)The Superintendent shall make periodical inspection rescue rooms and the apparatus and 
equipment under his control. 
 
(7)In the event of an emergency at a below ground mine, Superintendent shall perform such rescue 
and recovery work as may be assigned to him by the manager or in his absence by the principal official 
present at the surface. He shall within three days of completion of the rescue or recovery work send a report 
thereof to the Regional Inspector or the Chief Inspector. 
 
(8)The Superintendent shall maintain in a bound paged book a diary and shall record therein the 
results of each of his inspections and also the action taken by him to rectify the defects observed during 
inspection.   
 
(9)The Superintendent shall submit to the Chief Inspector and to the Regional Inspector detailed 
report on the functioning of the rescue station and rescue rooks under his control in the preceding year on 
or before the 20thl day of February of the succeeding year with particular reference to :- 
  
 
(a) type and number of equipment and apparatus provided and maintained; 
(b) Superintendent, instructors, rescue room Incharge and rescue brigades in position, as on the 
31
st December; 
(c) Number  of rescue trained persons at each below ground  mine served by the rescue station 
and number of such persons given refresher practices and medically examined, with results 
thereof; 
(d) Particulars of emergencies attended; 
(e) Any other relevant matter. 
 
13.Duties of Instructors:- (1) Under the direction of Superintendent the Instructor shall-  
 
(a) impart course of instructions and practices to persons selected for training in rescue and 
recovery work as well as to rescue trained persons and maintain a record thereof; and 
(b) make inspection, test and adjustment of rescue equipment and apparatus and maintain a 
record thereof. 
 
(2)In the event an emergency at a below ground mine, Instructors shall perform such rescue and 
recovery work as may be assigned to him by the manager or in his absence by the principal official present 
at the surface. 
 
(3)Instructor shall not leave the rescue station without prior permission of the Superintendent. 
 
(4)In the absence of the Superintendent, the Instructor shall be incharge of the rescue station. 
 
 
14.Duties and responsibilities of rescue room incharge:- Every rescue room incharge shall- 
 
(a) display prominently a list of mines served by his rescue room; 
(b) maintain the equipment and apparatus kept at the rescue room in perfect ;order; 
(c) maintain a proper record of all rescue equipment and apparatus kept at the rescue room and 
inspection thereof; and 
(d) not allow any unauthorised person; to enter into, or permit any unauthorised person to take 
out any apparatus or equipment from the rescue room. 
 
15.Duties of rescue trained persons posted  at rescue station:- The rescue trained person shall- 
 
(a) obey order of the Superintendent and Instructor and assist them in discharge  of their 
functions; 
(b) attend to messages, telephone calls and wireless and maintain record thereof; 
(c) maintain the rescue station in neat and tidy condition; 
(d) maintain the equipment and apparatus kept at the rescue station in perfect order; 
(e) perform rescue and recovery work in mines; and 
(f) not leave rescue station without obtaining permission from the Superintendent.    
 
16.Duties of rescue room attendant :- Every rescue room attendant shall- 
 
(a) not leave the rescue room until relieved by a substitute; 
(b) not allow any unauthorised person to enter in or to take out any apparatus or equipment from 
the rescue room; 
(c) attend to telephone calls and maintain a record thereof; 
(d) maintain the rescue room in neat and tidy condition; and 
(e) obey orders of the rescue room incharge and assist  him in discharge of his functions.   
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER IV 
 
Organisation and equipment in mines 
 
 
17.Telephone Communication – Every mine shall be connected telephonically with the rescue 
room and rescue station serving the mine. Wherever practicable wireless communication shall also be 
provided: 
 
  Provided that where there is no telephonic communication system, the Chief Inspector may by an 
order in writing and subject to such conditions as he may specify therein, approve any other means of 
communication. 
 
18.Rescue tracings:- There shall be kept at a below ground mine, more than three legible tracings 
of the working of the mine up to a date not before three preceding months. The tracing shall show the 
system of ventilation in the mine, and in particulars, the general direction of aircurrent, every point where 
the quantity of air is measured, every air-crossing, ventilation-door  stopping, booster fan and any other 
principal device for regulation and distribution of air, fire-dams, preparatory stoppings , every fire-fighting 
equipment, every water-dam with dimensions and other particulars of construction, every pumping, 
telephone and ambulance station, every room used for storing inflammable material, reserve stations and 
every haulage and travelling roadway. 
 
19.Appointment of rescue trained persons in mines, their disposition and accommodation:- (1) The 
manager of a below ground mine, where more than 100 persons are ordinarily employed below ground, 
shall ensure that at least 5 rescue trained persons are readily available at surface at any time.  
 
(2)The manager of a below ground mine, where more than 500 persons are ordinarily employed 
below ground , shall also ensure that persons on a scale of one man for every 100 persons or part thereof 
are rescue trained persons. 
 
(3)It shall be the responsibility of the owner to provide suitable accommodation:- 
 
(i) close to the rescue station to the Superintendent, Instructors and members of rescue 
brigade; 
(ii) close to rescue room to rescue room incharge rescue trained persons and attendants 
attached to it; and 
(iii) close to below ground mine entrance to rescue  trained persons other than those specified 
in ( i ) and (ii).   
 
(4)There shall be provided at a below ground mine effective bell or other arrangements, as may be 
approved by the Regional Inspector , for immediate  summoning  of rescue trained persons. 
 
 20.Selection of persons for training in rescue work:- No person shall be selected for training in rescue 
work, unless:- 
 
(i) he is  between 21 and 30 years of age and holds  a valid First-aid certificate of the 
standard of the St. John Ambulance Association (India); 
(ii) he is certified by the Manager that he has sufficient underground experience for the 
purpose of rescue work; 
(iii) he is certified by a qualified medical practitioner, as may be designated by the Manager 
after examination in accordance with Schedule VI, to be free from any organic disease or 
weakness and to be fit for undertaking  rescue work; and 
 
 
(iv) he is considered by the Superintendent of Rescue Station, after such examination and 
interview as he considers necessary , to be suitable for rescue work with breathing apparatus.   
 
21.Instructions and practices etc.-(1) Every person selected for training in rescue work shall 
undergo the course of instructions and practices as set out in Part I of Schedule VII until he has passed and 
has; been certified as efficient by the Superintendent . 
 
(2) Rescue trained person shall undergo practices and receive instructions as set out in Part II of 
Schedule VII. 
 
(3)A record shall be kept at every rescue station of all persons undergoing  practices and receiving 
instructions. Such record shall contain:- 
 
(i) the date and the character of each practice: 
(ii) the condition of each person after the practice, and if anything abnormal was observed in 
his condition, whether it was due to a defect of the apparatus or to that person ;and 
(iii) any other relevant information. 
 
22.Medical examination etc. of rescue trained person:- Every rescue trained person shall be re-
examined once at least in every twelve months by a qualified medical practitioner as may be  designated by 
the manager in accordance with Schedule VI, and in case he is declared medically unfit, he shall cease to be 
a rescue trained person with effect from the date he has been so declared. 
 
23.Suspension of rescue trained persons:- If in the opinion of the owner, agent, manager or an 
Inspector a rescue trained person is incompetent or is guilty of negligence or misconduct in the 
performance of his duties, the owner, agent, manager or Inspector as the case may be, may after giving 
such person an opportunity to give a written explanation, suspend him from or debar him for, undertaking 
any rescue and recovery work.   
 
CHAPTER V 
 
Conduct of rescue work 
 
24.Duties of Manager etc. in emergency:- (1) On receiving information of any emergency likely to 
require the services of a rescue team, the manager, or in his absence the Principal Official present at the 
surface, shall immediately:- 
 
(a) inform the rescue room or the rescue stations serving the mine for necessary assistance; 
(b) summon rescue trained person employed in the mine;  
(c) inform the owner, agent or manager of nearby mines to make available the services of rescue 
trained  persons employed therein: if so required;  
(d) inform the rescue station about the nature of the occurrence; stating whether assistance would 
be needed from the rescue station; 
(e) summon medical assistance; and 
(f) send information of the occurrence to the Regional Inspector. 
 
(2)All rescue and recovery work at a below ground mine shall be conducted under the control, 
direction and supervision of the manager of the mine or in his absence the principal official present at the 
surface. 
 
 
Provided that in the event of a major emergency, such as ignition, explosion , big underground fire 
or an accident involving a number of persons, the manager or the principal official shall, in taking decisions 
regarding rescue and recovery operations, take guidance from a ground consisting of a Senior Official of 
the management a representative each from the Director General of Mines Safety, concerned rescue station 
and the recognised Union of the Workers, so however that he must take necessary decisions and direct the 
operations as the situation warrants, without waiting for the constitution or deliberations of the said group. 
 
25.Accommodation at the below ground mine for persons engaged in rescue work:- Whenever 
rescue trained persons are engaged in rescue or recovery work at a below ground mine, thee shall be 
provided  at such mine suitable accommodation for storage and charging of apparatus required  for that 
work. Such accommodation shall be situated at a convenient place near the entrance in use, and shall be 
properly ventilated and lighted. Adequate quantity of cool and wholesale drinking water shall be provided 
at such accommodation; and proper canteen facilities shall also be provided for the rescue workers.   
 
26.Entry into below ground mines for rescue or recovery work:- (1) No person shall be allowed to 
enter a below ground mine or part thereof which is unsafe for the purpose of engaging in rescue or recovery 
work, unless authorised  by  the manager or in his absence by the principal official of the mine present at 
the surface. Only rescue trained persons shall be permitted to enter the mine for the purpose of using self-
contained breathing apparatus. 
 
(2)During the Course of rescue or recovery work, person or persons shall be stationed at the entrance to the 
below ground mine and shall keep a written record of all persons entering and leaving such mine, and the 
time thereof. 
 
27.Fresh air bases:- (1) As soon as possible, base or bases shall be established in fresh air, as near 
to the irrespirable zone or zones as safety permits, Every such base shall, if possible be connected by 
telephone: 
 
(i) if the base is below ground to the surface ; or 
(ii) if the base is on the surface, to the shaft bottom. 
 
(2)Except in cases where the delay involved may result in danger to life, rescue trained persons 
shall not proceed beyond any place where a base is to be established until there have been provided at such 
base:-  
 
(a) two persons, of whom one shall be a qualified medical practitioner if practicable, and other 
shall be a rescue trained person; 
(b) a spare team; with rescue apparatus, ready for immediate service; 
(c) one or more reviving apparatus, oxygen revivers etc, 
(d) first aid box and stretcher, 
(e) means of testing for carbon monoxide; 
(f) a hygrometer; and 
(g) two flame safety lamp. 
 
 
 
 
(3)Whenever men are already at work beyond the fresh air base, there shall be provided at the base 
as soon as possible the persons, apparatus and equipments specified sub –rule (2) 
 
28.Leader:- Every rescue team engaged in work with breathing apparatus in a mine shall be  under 
a leader who shall be appointed by the Superintendent. 
 
29.Instructions to leader:- Prior to sending a rescue team underground, the Superintendent or a 
person authorised by him shall give clear instructions to the leader of the team as to where it shall go and 
what it shall attempt. 
 
30.Test of apparatus:- Before proceeding below ground the leader shall test or witness the testing 
of self-contained breathing apparatus of the team for leakage. No such apparatus shall be used unless it is  
found safe. He shall check the equipment of his party, and immediately before entering irrespirable 
atmosphere shall make sure that all breathing apparatus are working properly.  
 
31.Duties of leader below ground : (1) The leader shall not engage in mnual work. He shall give 
his attention solely to directing the team and to maintaining its safety. He shall examine the roof and 
supports during the journey, and if there is any liklihood of fall at any place along the roadway, shall not 
proceed further until the team has made the place secure. 
 
 (2)The leader shall keep the team together and shall not allow any member of the team to stray. 
 
(3).If the atmosphere is clear, the leaderl shall, when passing the junction of two or more 
readways, clerly indicatethe route by means of arrow marks in chalk. If the atmosphere is obscure, the 
leader shall see that a life line is lead in from the fresh air base, and shall not allow any member of the team 
to move out of reach of that line; or, if that course is impracticable, he shall not proceed until every 
roadway branching of from the route is fenced across the whole opening. 
 
(4).When using rescue apparatus, the leader shall carry a watch, shall record the presssure of the 
compressed oxygen at intervals of 20 minutes or so, and shall commence the return journey in ample time. 
During travelling he shall adopt the pace of slowest member, if any member of the team is in distress, shall 
immediately return to the fresh air base with the whole team. 
 
(5).The leader shall not permit any meber of the team using breathing apparatus in a mine to 
remain at work at any onel time for a period longer than one and half hours or such other period as may be 
specified by the Chief Inspector  in respect of the breathing apparatus being used.  
 
32.Rescue team members and their duties:- (1) The number of persons in any rescue team using 
breathing apparatus in a mine shall not be less than five not morel than six, including the leader. 
 
(2).In case there is no provision in any of the breathing apparatus caried by the rescue team for a 
extension for supply of oxygen to another person inan emergency, the team shall carry a self rescuer. 
 
(3).Members of rescue team shall in general, use the signals prescribed in Schedule VIII in 
communicating to one another. 
 
(4).In travelling with rescue apparatus on, every member of the team shall keep the place given to 
him when numbering off. If the pace is too quick orif distress is felt, the mber shall at once call attention to 
the fact. 
 
 
(5).Every member of a rescue team engaged in work with breathing apparatus in amine shall obey 
the order of the leader of the team. 
 
33.Restriction of second spell of works:- No person shall commence a second or ;subsequent spell 
of work in irrespirable atmosphere without being examined and found fit by a qualified medical 
practitioner. 
 
 
CHAPTER VI 
 
Miscellaneous 
 
34.Obligation of owner, agent and manager in certain situations:- Whenever emergency arises at a 
below ground mine, whether served by a rescue room or rescue station or not, the owner, agent or manager 
may seek assistance or additional assistance as the case may be from the nearest rescue room or rescue 
station and in such an event:- 
 
(a) all possible assistance shall be promptly rendered by the rescue room or rescue station; and 
(b) the owner of the mine shall pay to the owner of the rescue station or rescue room, rendering 
such assistance, the full cost of rescue services and facilities borrowed. 
 
35.General management:- It shall be the responsibility of the owner to establish, maintain and 
ensure proper functioning of rescue room or rescue station as required under these rules, to appoint 
Superintendent, instructors, rescue room incharge, rescue trained persons, and to provide necessary rescue 
equipment and apparatus as may be necessary for compliance with the provisions of these rules. 
 
36.Inspections:- (1) The Chief Inspector or other Inspector, authorised by him in his behalf or the 
Regional Inspector may enter, inspect and examine any rescue station and rescue room and make such 
examination or inquiry as he thinks fit in order to ascertain whether the provisions of these rules and of any 
orders made thereunder are being complied with.  
 
(2).When the below ground mines served by a rescue station or rescue room fall under the 
jurisdiction of two or more Regional Inspectors, the Chief Inspector may authorise any one of them for 
enforcement of these rules. 
 
37.Power to relax:- Where in the opinion of the Chief Inspector, the conditions pertaining to a 
mine or rescue station or rescue room are such as to render compliance with any provisions contained in 
these rules, unnecessary or impracticable, he may by an order in writing and subject to such conditions as 
he may specify therein grant exemption from the said provisions. 
 
38.Repeal and saving :- (1) The Coal Mines Rescue Rules, 1959 are hereby repealed. 
 
(2).Not withstanding such repeal anything done or any action taken under the said rules shall be 
deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of these rules. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FORM I 
 
[See rule 3(4)] 
 
Intimation of appointment etc. of Superintendent. 
 
From 
 
 
To 
1. The Chief Inspector of Mines, 
Dhanbad-826001. 
2. The Regional Inspector of Mines, 
 
 
Sir, 
 
 I have to furnish the following particulars in respect of appointment/termination of appointment of 
Superintendent at …………………………………………………rescue station 
of……………………………(Owner) 
 
1.Name of Superintendent……………………………………………………………….. 
 
2.Qualifications (a) First Class Manager’s (Coal/Metalliferous*) Certificate No…………….. 
              (b)Number of Certificate of Competency in undertake Rescue and Recovery 
      work……………………………………………………………………… 
 
  (c)First-aid Certificate No………………………………………………….. 
 
3.Date of assumption/relinquishment of charge………………………………………………… 
 
4.Address of Superintendent 
 
 
 
        Yours faithfully, 
 
 
Place………………………….                                        Signature ………………………… 
Date…………………………..                                        Owner 
 
 
 Delete whatever is not applicable. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FORM II 
 
[See rule 11 (7)] 
 
Notice of accident 
 
From……………………….. 
 
 
To 
 
1.The Chief Inspector of Mines, 
   Dhanbad –826001. 
2.The Regional Inspector of Mines,  
 
 
Sir, 
 
 I have to furnish the following particulars of an accident 
at……………………………..mines/rescue station/re scue room of ……………………..(owner). 
1.Situation  of mines/rescue station/rescue room             Name and postal        Village  Post  Office Police 
                                                                                           address of owner      Station  Sub-Division(Taluqa) 
                                                                                                                             District 
                  State Pin 
 
 
 
 
2.Date and hour of accident   Place of location of accident       Number of persons 
                                                                                            in mine/rescue station/         
                                                                                                 rescue room*                            
                                                                                                                                           Killed        Seriously 
                        Injured 
 
 
 
3.Cause and description of accident 
4.Name of persons killed/injured  Nature of employment  Age Sex Nature of injury/ 
                                                                                                                                                cause of death. 
 
 
         Y o u r s  f a i t h f u l l y ,  
 
       Signature ……………….. 
       Designation-Manager/Superintendent  
Place……………. 
Date……………. 
*Delete whatever is not applicable. 
 
 
 
 
 
SCHEDULE I 
 
[See rule 11(1)] 
 
Equipment to be kept at a Rescue Station 
 
 
A BREATHING APPARATUS       Nos. 
 
1. Two-hours self –contained breathing apparatus    54 
 
2. Short duration self-contained breathing apparatus     6 
 
3. Absorbent charges                2,000 
 
B. RESUSCITATING APPARATUS 
 
1. Resuscitating Apparatus       12 
 
2. Spare cylinders         8 
 
C.TUBE APPARATUS 
 
 (a)Pressure type with belows       2 
 
 (b)Spare helmets         2 
 
 (c)Pressure type with fan        1 
 
D.ANCILLARY EQUIPMENT 
 
 1.Oxygen cylinders       12 
 
 2.(a) Oxygen pump (hand driven)        4 
     (b) Oxygen pump (power driven)        2 
 
 3. Bobin meter          3 
 4. Flow meter          2 
 5. Universal tester         2 
 6. Pressure gauge testing device        2 
 7. Oxygen testing apparatus        1 
 8. Apparatus testing tool kit        8 
 
E. LAMPS ETC. AND GAS TESTING DEVICE 
 
 1. Flame safety lamps with maintenance kit       8 
2.Electric safety lamps 
 
 
  